.\" $Id: adcfit.1,v 1.2 2006/04/20 12:54:32 ucacdxa Exp $

.TH adcfit 1

.SH NAME
adcfit \- Fits the apparent diffusion coefficient to diffusion MRI measurements.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B adcfit
<data file> <scheme file>

.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads diffusion MRI data, acquired using the acquisition scheme detailed in the scheme
file, from the data file. The data file stores the diffusion MRI data in voxel order with
the measurements stored as big-endian four-byte floats and ordered as in the scheme file.
See modelfit(1) and camino(1) for the format of the data file and scheme file. The
program fits the apparent diffusion coefficient to the measurements in each voxel and
outputs the results, in voxel order and as big-endian eight-byte doubles, to the standard
output. The program outputs three values in each voxel: [exit code, ln(S(0)), ADC]. An
exit code of zero indicates no problems. For a list of other exit codes, see modelfit(1).
The value of S(0) is an estimate of the signal at q=0.

This program is a simple interface to the program modelfit. The modelfit program provides
more options for fitting the diffusion coefficient or tensor.

If the first command line argument is a hyphen (i.e. "-") the program reads data from the
standard input.

.SH EXAMPLES
Fit the apparent diffusion coefficient to the data in SubjectA.Bfloat using linear
regression to the log measurements:

adcfit SubjectA.Bfloat A.scheme > ADC_A.Bdouble

Equivalently:

cat SubjectA.Bfloat | adcfit - A.scheme > ADC_A.Bdouble

or

modelfit -inversion -1 -schemefile A.scheme < SubjectA.Bfloat > ADC_A.Bdouble

.SH "AUTHORS"
Daniel Alexander <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
modelfit(1), dtfit(1), twotenfit(1), threetenfit(1), fa(1), trd(1), shfit(1), shanis(1)

.SH BUGS
