.\" $Id: addnoise.1,v 1.2 2006/04/20 12:54:32 ucacdxa Exp $

.TH addnoise 1

.SH NAME
addnoise \- Adds noise to diffusion MRI measurements.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B addnoise -sigma <noise std> [-noisetype <type>]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads diffusion MRI data and adds noise with standard deviation specified with the -sigma
option. By default the noise is Rician with the specified value of sigma, but can be
Gaussian by specifying -noisetype gaussian.

The -sigma <sig> option specifies the standard deviation of the noise.
With the Gaussian noise model, addnoise adds a Gaussian-distributed
random number with mean zero and standard deviation <sig> to each
measurement in the input data set.  If you choose Rician noise, it
adds real and imaginary random numbers each Gaussian distributed with
zero mean and std <sig>, then takes the modulus, ie S = |S*+N1 + i N2|
where S is the noisy signal, S* is the noise free signal, and N1 and
N2 are the random numbers.

The signal to noise ratio (SNR) is S*/<sig>.  That value varies with
the diffusion weighting, so often we say that the SNR of a whole data
set is S*(0)/<sig>, where S*(0) is the b=0, ie unweighted, signal.  If
using addnoise with synthetic data from datasynth and the data comes
from a compartment or tensor model, S*(0) is usually 1; if it comes
from a Monte Carlo simulation, it is the number of walkers in the
simulation.  You need to adjust <sig> accordingly to give the SNR you
want.

.SH EXAMPLES
Add Rician noise to synthetic data:

datasynth -testfunc 1 -schemefile A.scheme -voxels 10 | addnoise -sigma 0.0625

The above is very similar to:

datasynth -testfunc 1 -schemefile A.scheme -voxels 10 -snr 16

only addnoise uses a different random number generator.

Add Gaussian noise instead:

datasynth -testfunc 1 -schemefile A.scheme -voxels 10 | addnoise -sigma 0.0625 -noisetype
Gaussian

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-noisetype\fR [\fIrician|gaussian\fR]
Specifies the noise model.  The default is Rician, can also specify Gaussian.

.TP
.B \-sigma\fR  <\fIS\fR>
Specifies the noise level.  This is the standard deviation of the Gaussian distribution
for Gaussian noise or that of the isotropic Gaussians on each component for Rician noise.

.SH "AUTHORS"
Daniel Alexander <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
datasynth(1)

.SH BUGS
