.\" $Id$

.TH analyze2voxel 1

.SH NAME
analyze2voxel \- Converts scanner-order data in Analyze format to voxel-order data.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B analyze2voxel
-4dimage <file> | -imagelist <file> [\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION

This program is now a wrapper for \fBimage2voxel\fR, which also supports image formats
other than Analyze.

.SH EXAMPLES
Convert a 4D scanner order data file ScannerOrder.img, for which the measurement volume
has size 128x128x60 and the acquisition scheme acquires 6 measurements with b=0 and 54
diffusion-weighted measurements, to voxel order. The header ScannerOrder.hdr has
height=128, width=128, depth=60, nImages=60.

  analyze2voxel -4dimage ScannerOrder > VoxelOrder.Bfloat

This is equivalent to the command:

  scanner2voxel -voxels 983040 -components 60 < ScannerOrder.img > VoxelOrder.Bfloat

Convert Analyze images stored as 3D volumes, listed in the file volumes.txt, to voxel
order, and output the results as double:

  analyze2voxel -imagelist volumes.txt -outputdatatype double > VoxelOrder.Bdouble

Do the same thing, but this time the 3D volumes are in the directory ./data

  analyze2voxel -imagelist volumes.txt -imageprefix ./data/ -outputdatatype double > VoxelOrder.Bdouble

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-4dimageroot\fR <root>
Root for a file \fIroot\fR.hdr and \fIroot\fR.img. This should be a 4D Analyze file where
 each 3D volume is an image from a single diffusion-weighted measurement. The order of
the measurement volumes must correspond to the accompanying scheme file. This option is
deprecated (though it still works) and has been replaced by the \fB-4dimage\fR option,
which takes the full header file name rather than just the root.

.TP
.B \-imagelist\fR <\fIfilename\fR>
Name of a file containing a list of 3D Analyze headers. The images paired with each
header are images of a single diffusion-weighted measurement. The order of the headers in
the list must match the order of the corresponding measurements in the scheme file.

.TP
.B \-imageprefix\fR <\fIprefix\fR>
Path to prepend onto filenames in the imagelist. Has no effect on paths specified on the
command  line with \fB\-4dimageroot\fR. The default prefix is the directory containing
the image list. This option is used when the imagelist is not in the same directory as
the images it describes.

.TP
.B \-outputdatatype\fR <\fIdata type of output\fR>
Specifies the data type of the output data.  The data type can be any of the following 
strings: "char", "short", "int", "long", "float" or "double". The default output data
type is float.

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
image2voxel(1), scanner2voxel(1)

.SH BUGS
