.TH averagedwi 1

.SH NAME
averagedwi \- Create an average DWI image over some or all of the data.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B averagedwi -inputfile <\fRdwi\fR> [\fIoptions\fR]


 
.SH DESCRIPTION

Computes an average DWI image from input data. The average may be computed over all
the data or over particular shells defined by a range of b-values.

For example, the average b=0 image can serve as a reference for motion correction. Alternatively,
the mean or median DWI at some b-value can be useful for normalization to a structural image.

The user may select the b-values over which to average. This allows the selection of subsets of
multi-shell data, or to select a single shell where the actual b-values vary from their nominal
value. 


.SH OUTPUT

A voxelwise average (mean or median) of the selected DWI data.


.SH EXAMPLES

Get the average of all the measurements

  averagedwi -inputfile dwi.nii.gz -schemefile A.scheme > mean_all.Bfloat


Get only DWI measurements on a shell at b=1000, given variation in diffusion weighting actually
achieved by the scanner varies by +/- 20 s / mm^2:

  averagedwi -inputfile dwi.nii.gz -schemefile A.scheme -minbval 990 -maxbval 1010 -outputfile mean_b1000.nii.gz


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-schemefile\fR 
Scheme file for the complete imaging scheme. 

.TP
.B \-minbval\fR <\fImin\fR> 
Minimum b-value to include in the average. Default 0. In the same units as the scheme file.

.TP
.B \-maxbval\fR <\fImax\fR> 
Maximum b-value to include in the average. Default infinity (include all b-values). In the same units as 
the scheme file.

.TP
.B \-median\fR
Output the median rather than the mean of the selected volumes. Requires more memory.



.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
split4dnii(1)

.SH BUGS
