.\" $Id$

.TH ballstickfit 1

.SH NAME
ballstickfit \- Fits a partial volume model to diffusion MRI measurements.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ballstickfit
<data file> <scheme file> [options]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads diffusion MRI data, acquired using the acquisition scheme detailed in the scheme
file, and fits the e ball and stick partial volume model [Behrens et al, MRM
50:1077-1088, (2003)].

For help with scheme files, please see the section "scheme files" in camino(1).

The data file stores the diffusion MRI data in voxel order with the measurements stored
as big-endian four-byte floats and ordered as in the scheme file. See modelfit(1) and
camino(1) for the format of the data file and scheme file. The program fits the diffusion
tensor to each voxel and outputs the results, in voxel order and as big-endian eight-byte
doubles, to the standard output. The program outputs eight values in each voxel:
[exitcode, ln(S(0)), d, f, vx, vy, vz]. The model, as parameterized in Friman et al,
IEEE-TMI 25:965-978 (2006), is

  S(\fBg\fR_i, b_i) = S(0) [ (1-f) exp(-b_i d) + f exp(-b_i d [\fBg\fR.\fBv\fR]^2) ]

where the wavenumber of measurement i is \fBq\fR_i, the gradient direction \fBg\fR_i =
\fBq\fR_i / |q_i|, and the b-value b_i is |q_i|^2 t, where t is the diffusion time. The
measured signal is modelled as a combination of isotropic diffusion (the ball) and
diffusion along the axis \fBv\fR=[vx, vy, vz] (the stick). The two compartments share a
common diffusion coefficient, d.

The model parameters are fit to the data using Levenberg-Marquardt optimization. An exit
code of zero indicates no problems. For a list of other exit codes, see modelfit(1). An
exit code of 2 indicates an optimization failure; in this case a linear DT fit is
substituted: f is set to the fractional anisotropy of the DT, d is set to tr(D) / 3, and
v is the principal eigenvector of the tensor.


This program is a simplified wrapper to \fBmodelfit\fR. The command

 ballstickfit SubjectA.Bfloat A.scheme 

is equivalent to

 modelfit -inputfile SubjectA.Bfloat -schemefile A.scheme -inversion -3

To read data from stdin, do:

 cat <data file> | ballstickfit - A.scheme

.SH EXAMPLES

 cat SubjectA.Bfloat | ballstickfit - A.scheme > ballstick.Bdouble

 pdview -inputmodel ballstick -inputfile ballstick.Bdouble

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
modelfit(1)

.SH BUGS
