.TH conmat 1

.SH NAME
conmat \- Creates streamline connectivity matrices

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B conmat -targetfile\fR <\fIfile\fR> \fB\-outputroot\fR \fI<root>\fR [\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION

Creates a connectivity matrix using a 3D label image (the target image) and a set of
streamlines. The connectivity matrix records how many streamlines connect each pair of
targets, and optionally the mean tractwise statistic (eg tract-averaged FA, or length).

The output is a comma separated variable file or files. The first row of the output
matrix is label names. Label names may be defined by the user, otherwise they are
assigned based on label intensity.

Starting from the seed point, we move along the streamline until we find a point in 
a labeled region. This is done in both directions from the seed point. Streamlines are 
counted if they connect two target regions, one on either side of the seed point. Only 
the labeled region closest to the seed is counted, for example if the input contains 
two streamlines:

  1: A-----B------SEED---C

  2: A--------SEED-----------

then the output would be

  A,B,C
  0,0,0
  0,0,1
  0,1,0

There are zero connections to A because in streamline 1, the connection to B is closer
to the seed than the connection to A, and in streamline 2 there is no region reached 
in the other direction.

The connected target regions can have the same label, as long as the seed point is 
outside of the labeled region and both ends connect to the same label (which may be in 
different locations). Therefore this is allowed:

  A------SEED-------A

Such fibers will add to the diagonal elements of the matrix. To remove these entries, 
run \fBprocstreamlines\fR with \fB-endpointfile\fR before running \fBconmat\fR.

If the seed point is inside a labled region, it counts as one end of the connection. 
So

  ----[SEED inside A]---------B

counts as a connection between A and B, while

  C----[SEED inside A]---------B

counts as a connection between A and C, because C is closer to the seed point.

In all cases, distance to the seed point is defined along the streamline path.


.SH EXAMPLES

  cat tracts.Bdouble | conmat -targetfile targets.nii.gz -outputroot conmat_

This will output conmat_sc.csv

  cat tracts.Bdouble | conmat -targetfile targets.nii.gz -scalarfile fa.nii.gz -outputroot conmat_

This will output conmat_sc.csv and conmat_ts.csv. The mean FA is computed for each tract;
the average of these values is output in conmat_ts.csv.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-targetfile\fR <\ffile\fR> 
An image containing targets, as used in \fBprocstreamlines\fR.

.TP
.B \-outputroot\fR <\fIfile\fR>
File root for the output. The extension will be determined from the input.

.TP
.B \-scalarfile\fR <\fIfile\fR>
Optional scalar file for computing tract-based statistics. Must be in the same space as
the target file.

.TP
.B \-tractstat\fR <\fIstat\fR>
Tract statistic to use. The default is "mean" if a scalar file is present. See tractstats(1) for 
other options.

.TP
.B \-targetnamefile\fR <\fIfile\fR>
Optional names of targets. This file should contain one entry per line, with the target
intensity followed by the name, separated by white space or commas. For example:

  1	some_brain_region
  2     some_other_region

These names will be used in the output. The names themselves should not contain commas,
spaces should be quoted eg "some brain region". The labels may be in any order but the output 
matrices will be ordered by label intensity.

If you only want to consider a subset of labels, such as a single hemisphere, you can pass
a target name file containing only the labels you want to use. Other labels in the target image
will be ignored.


.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
procstreamlines(1), tractstats(1)

.SH BUGS
