.\" $Id$

.TH dt2mha 1

.SH NAME
dt2mha \- Converts Camino tensors to mha files.

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBdt2mha\fR -inputfile <\fIfile\fR> -outputroot <\fIroot\fR> -header <\fIheader\fR> 

.SH EXAMPLES

Straight pipeline

    cat data.Bfloat | dtfit - schemefile | dt2mha -header image.mha -outputroot camino_


Convert an existing tensor file dt.Bfloat

    dt2mha -inputfile dt.Bfloat -inputdatatype float -header image.mha -outputroot camino_
 

.SH DESCRIPTION

Reads Camino diffusion tensors, and converts them to MHA format. The output is three mha
files:

   
  ${root}dt.mha - diffusion tensors.
  ${root}exitcode.mha - exit codes from Camino reconstruction.
  ${root}lns0.mha - estimated lns0 from Camino reconstruction.

The supplied mha header (which may or may not be attached to an image) is used to
initialize MHA header fields for the output. The header should correctly describe the
physical space of the tensor image.

The output data type can be set at run time.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-outputroot\fR <\fIroot\fR>
Prepended onto output file names.

.TP
.B \-header\fR <\fIheader\fR>
An mha file to use as the header. Usually this will be the header of the raw data file
from which the diffusion tensors were reconstructed.

.TP
.B \-outputdatatype\fR <\fItype\fR>
Overrides the defaut output data type of "float" for all images.

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
analyzedti(1)

.SH BUGS

It is not clear how MHA files should be compressed, so use of the -gzip option is not
recommended.
