.\" $Id$

.TH dt2nii 1

.SH NAME
dt2nii \- Converts Camino tensors to nii files.

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBdt2nii\fR -inputfile <\fIfile\fR> -outputroot <\fIroot\fR> -header <\fIheader\fR> 

.SH EXAMPLES

Straight pipeline

    cat data.Bfloat | dtfit - schemefile | dt2nii -header image.nii -outputroot camino_


Convert an existing tensor file dt.Bfloat

    dt2nii -inputfile dt.Bfloat -inputdatatype float -header image.nii -outputroot camino_
 

.SH DESCRIPTION

Reads Camino diffusion tensors, and converts them to NIFTI format. The output is
dependent on the input model. For all input models, the output includes

   
  ${root}exitcode.nii[.gz] - exit codes from Camino reconstruction.
  ${root}lns0.nii[.gz] - estimated lns0 from Camino reconstruction.

For input model "dt" (the default), the diffusion tensors are written to

  ${root}dt.nii[.gz]

For multi-tensor data, additional files are written:

  ${root}dt${i}.nii[.gz] - tensor component i
  ${root}mix${i}.nii[.gz] - estimated mixing fraction for tensor i


The supplied nii header (which may or may not be attached to an image) is used to
initialize NIFTI header fields for the output. The header should correctly describe the
physical space of the tensor image. The following fields are overwritten:

  dim[0]      - set to 5 for the dt file, 3 for other images
  intent_code - set to NIFTI_INTENT_SYMMATRIX for the dt, NIFTI_INTENT_NONE for the others
  scl_slope   - set to 1
  scl_inter   - set to 0

The output data type can be set at run time.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-outputroot\fR <\fIroot\fR>
Prepended onto output file names.

.TP
.B \-header\fR <\fIheader\fR>
A Nifti .nii or .nii.gz file containing the header information. Usually this will be the
header of the raw data file from which the diffusion tensors were reconstructed.

.TP
.B \-outputdatatype\fR <\fItype\fR>
Overrides the defaut output data type of "float" for all images.

.TP
.B \-inputmodel\fR <\fImodel\fR>
Either "dt" (default), "twotensor", "threetensor", "multitensor".

.TP
.B \-maxcomponents\fR <\fIcomps\fR>
Maximum tensor components, for use with input model "multitensor". 

.TP
.B \-gzip\fR
Write .nii.gz files instead of .nii, even if the input header is .nii.

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
voxel2image(1), nii2dt(1)

.SH BUGS
