.\" $Id: dteig.1,v 1.11 2006/06/30 14:16:33 ucacpco Exp $

.TH dteig 1

.SH NAME
dteig \- Computes the eigensystem of tensors.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dteig -inputmodel <dt (default) | multitensor>

.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads diffusion tensor (single, two-tensor, three-tensor or multitensor) data from the
standard input, computes the eigenvalues and eigenvectors of each tensor and outputs the
results to the standard output. For multiple-tensor data the program outputs the
eigensystem of each tensor. For each tensor the program outputs: {l_1, e_11, e_12, e_13,
l_2, e_21, e_22, e_33, l_3, e_31, e_32, e_33}, where l_1 >= l_2 >= l_3 and e_i = (e_i1,
e_i2, e_i3) is the eigenvector with eigenvalue l_i. For three-tensor data, for example,
the output contains thirty-six values per voxel.

.SH EXAMPLES

Compute the eigensystem in each voxel of diffusion MRI data set SubjectA.Bfloat and store
the output in EigenA.Bdouble:

dtfit SubjectA.Bfloat test/A.scheme | dteig > EigenA.Bdouble

Compute the eigensystem for each component of the two-tensor fit to the same data set:

twotenfit SubjectA.Bfloat test/A.scheme | dteig -inputmodel multitensor > EigenA.Bdouble

Compute the eigensystem for 10000 independent trials of fitting the diffusion tensor to
data synthesized from test function 1 (see datasynth(1)) using imaging scheme A.scheme
and assuming signal to noise ratio of 16 at b=0:

datasynth -testfunc 1 -voxels 10000 -snr 16 -schemefile A.scheme | dtfit - A.scheme |
dteig > EigenA_SNR16.Bdouble

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-inputmodel\fR <\fImodel type\fR>
Specifies the model that the input data contains parameters for. Possible model types
are: "dt" (diffusion-tensor data) and "multitensor" (see multitenfit(1)). By default, the
program assumes that the input data contains a single diffusion tensor in each voxel. If
the input model is "multitensor", the program assumes a maximum of two tensors per voxel
unless told otherwise with the \fB\-maxcomponents\fR option.

.TP
.B \-maxcomponents \fR <\fInumber\fR>
The maximum number of tensor components in a voxel of the input data.

.TP
.B \-inputdatatype\fR <\fIdata type of input\fR>
Specifies the data type of the input file.  The data type can be any of the following
strings: "char", "short", "int", "long", "float" or "double". See camino(1).

.TP
.B \-outputdatatype\fR <\fIdata type of output\fR>
Specifies the data type of the output data.  The data type can be any of the following
strings: "char", "short", "int", "long", "float" or "double". See camino(1).

.SH AUTHORS
Daniel Alexander <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
fa(1), trd(1), dtfit(1), twotenfit(1), threetenfit(1), modelfit(1).

.SH BUGS
