.\" $Id: dtfit.1,v 1.9 2006/07/13 15:30:34 ucacpco Exp $

.TH dtfit 1

.SH NAME
dtfit \- Fits the diffusion tensor to diffusion MRI measurements.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dtfit
<data file> <scheme file> [-nonlinear] [options]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads diffusion MRI data, acquired using the acquisition scheme detailed in the scheme
file, from the data file. For help with scheme files, please see the section "scheme
files" in camino(1).

The data file stores the diffusion MRI data in voxel order with the measurements stored
in big-endian format and ordered as in the scheme file. The default input data type is
four-byte float. The default output data type is eight-byte double.

See modelfit(1) and camino(1) for the format of the data file and scheme file. The
program fits the diffusion tensor to each voxel and outputs the results, in voxel order
and as big-endian eight-byte doubles, to the standard output. The program outputs eight
values in each voxel: [exit code, ln(S(0)), D_xx, D_xy, D_xz, D_yy, D_yz, D_zz]. An exit
code of zero indicates no problems. For a list of other exit codes, see modelfit(1). The
entry S(0) is an estimate of the signal at q=0.

This program is a simplified wrapper to \fBmodelfit\fR. Options other that
\fB-nonlinear\fR are documented in modelfit(1). The command

 dtfit SubjectA.Bfloat A.scheme

is equivalent to

 modelfit -inputfile SubjectA.Bfloat -schemefile A.scheme -inversion 1

The command

 dtfit SubjectA.Bfloat A.scheme -nonlinear

is equivalent to

 modelfit -inputfile SubjectA.Bfloat -schemefile A.scheme -inversion 2

To read data from stdin, do:

 cat <data file> | dtfit - A.scheme

The handedness of the coordinate system used by the scanner may not agree with that used
within Camino. If this happens, the anisotropy and trace of tensors will be correct but
the orientations will be incorrect. This problem is often only noticed during
tractography. A simple way to check for this is to fit the diffusion tensors and
visualize the principal directions with the \fBdtpdview\fR program. If the principal
directions appear to be rotated by 180 degrees about the X, Y or Z directions, then the
likely cause is that the gradient directions do not agree. This can be remedied by
negating the relevant entries in the scheme file.

By default, the program uses linear regression to the log measurements, but may also use
non-linear fitting to the raw measurements, which is slower but slightly more accurate.

If the first command line argument is - the program reads data from the standard input.

.SH EXAMPLES
Fit the diffusion tensor to the data in SubjectA.Bfloat using linear regression to the
log measurements:

dtfit SubjectA.Bfloat A.scheme > DiffTensorA.Bdouble

Equivalently:

cat SubjectA.Bfloat | dtfit - A.scheme > DiffTensorA.Bdouble

Fit the diffusion tensor to the data in SubjectA.Bfloat using non-linear fitting:

dtfit SubjectA.Bfloat A.scheme -nonlinear > DiffTensorA.Bdouble

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-nonlinear
Use non-linear fitting instead of the default linear regression to the log measurements.

.SH "AUTHORS"
Daniel Alexander <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
modelfit(1), twotenfit(1), threetenfit(1), fa(1), trd(1), shfit(1), shanis(1)

.SH BUGS
