.\" $Id: dtlutgen.1,v 1.13 2006/06/30 14:16:33 ucacpco Exp $

.TH dtlutgen 1

.SH NAME
dtlutgen \- Generates a PICo lookup table (LUT) or tables.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dtlutgen 
-[l|f]range <\fImin\fR> <\fImax\fR> -step <\fIstep\fR> -snr <\fIvalue\fR> -schemefile
<\fIfile\fR> [\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
PICo tractogaphy requires a look-up table that maps FA of the diffusion tensor to  the
uncertainty in fibre orientation estimate. This command is used to construct this look-up
table. The lookup table contains the parameters of the PICo PDFs given a set of imaging
parameters and noise conditions. For each entry in the lookup table, the generator
synthesizes sets of MRI measurements from a Gaussian model, at the specified \fIsnr\fR,
performs the inversion, extracts the principal directions and fits the parameters of the
PDF (see modelfit(1)). The range of the LUT is specified by the user. For single tensor
LUTs, the indices of the LUT are the ratios of the first and second eigenvalues L1 and L2
to the third eigenvalue L3. For two-tensor LUTs, the tensors are always axisymmetric, and
the indices are fractional anisotropy.

Two tensor LUTs are calculated with a fixed angle between the two tensors. This is to
allow parallelization of the LUT generation. LUTs can be calculated at fixed intervals
over a range of angles and combined with \fBcombinetwofibreluts\fR.

The lookup table is specific to the imaging scheme, inversion and SNR specified to this
program. The units of the b-values in the scheme file should agree with those of the
diffusion tensors used in the simulations. By default, this is SI units (diffusivity is
in m^2 / s). You can modify the trace of the tensors with the \fB-trace\fR option. For
example, if your b-values are in s/mm^2, a typical diffusion tensor in brain parenchyma
will have a trace of approximately 2.1 x 10^{-3}.

Three models of the PICo fibre-orientation PDF are supported. The Watson PDF has circular
contours on the sphere and is a good model of noise-based uncertainty for cylindrically
symmetric diffusion tensors. The Bingham PDF has elliptical contours on the sphere, and
is more suitable for non cylindrically-symmetric tensors. The Angular Central Gaussian
PDF also has elliptical contours, and is suitable for very noisy data with low
concentration. We recommend the Bingham model for general use. This is the default if no
PDF is specified.

If one PDF is specified on the command line, the output of dtlutgen is a single LUT which
is sent to stdout, or the file specified by \fB\%\-outputfile\fR. If no PDF is specified,
the default is bingham. If multiple PDFs are required, they can be computed
simultaneously by specifying more than one PDF on the command line. This saves time
compared to computing the LUTs separately, because the synthetic data is only generated
once.

The output is a binary file containing a header and all the LUT entries. The header
contains the dimensions of the LUT, the step sizes, and the number of values at each
entry in the LUT. The header size is 80 bytes.

Two-tensor LUTs are computed with a single crossing angle between the two tensors. LUTs
with a range of crossing angles can be computed serially or in parallel and combined with
\fBcombinetwofibreluts\fR. The LUTs are interpolated, so an angular resolution of 10
degrees should be sufficient. With 60 measurements and an SNR of 16, our experience
suggests that two tensor fitting is not reliable when the crossing angle is less than 45
degrees.

.SH EXAMPLES

Generate a LUT for the Bingham distribution, over the range L1 / L3 = 1 to 15. This is a
sensible default for single tensor PICo. We use the default sample size (2000) and
inversion (1).

dtlutgen -lrange 1 15 -step 0.2 -snr 16 -schemefile A.scheme >
Ascheme_bingham_snr16_inv1.Bdouble


Generate LUTs over a range of anisotropy, from L1 / L3 = 1 to L1 / L3 = 10. Produces luts
for the ACG, Bingham, and Watson distribution called oneTensor_Ascheme_{acg, bingham,
watson}_snr16_inv1.Bdouble

dtlutgen -lrange 1 10 -step 0.1 -samples 5000 -snr 16 -schemefile A.scheme -inversion 1
{-watson|-acg|-bingham} -outputroot oneTensor_Ascheme_


Generate a two-Bingham LUT over a range of anisotropy, from FA = 0.3 to FA = 0.9. This is
a sensible range for SNR 16, tensors with FA less than about 0.3 are not resolved
reliably.

dtlutgen -frange 0.3 0.9 -step 0.05 -samples 2000 -snr 16 -schemefile A.scheme -inversion
22 -cross 90 > twoBingham_Ascheme_snr16_inv22_90.Bdouble

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-lrange\fR <\fIlMin lMax\fR>
Index to one-tensor LUTs. This is the ratio L1/L3 and L2 / L3. The LUT is square, with
half the values calculated (because L2 / L3 cannot be less than L1 / L3 by definition).
The minimum must be >= 1. For comparison, a ratio L1 / L3 = 10 with L2 / L3 = 1
corresponds to an FA of 0.891, and L1 / L3 = 15 with L2 / L3 = 1 corresponds to an FA of
0.929. The default range is 1 to 10.

.TP
.B \-frange\fR <\fIfMin fMax\fR>
Index to two-tensor LUTs. This is the fractional anisotropy of the two tensors. The
default is 0.3 to 0.94

.TP
.B \-step\fR <\fIsize\fR>
Distance between points in the LUT. For example, if lrange is 1 to 10 and the step is
0.1, LUT entries will be computed at L1 / L3 = 1, 1.1, 1.2 ... 10.0 and at L2 / L3 = 1.0,
1.1 ... L1 / L3. For single tensor LUTs, the default step is 0.2, for two-tensor LUTs it
is 0.02.

.TP
.B \-samples\fR <\fInumber\fR>
The number of synthetic measurements to generate at each point in the LUT. The default is
2000.

.TP
.B \-snr\fR <\fIvalue\fR>
The signal to noise ratio of the unweighted (q = 0) measurements. This should match the
SNR (in white matter) of the images that the LUTs are used with.

.TP
.B \-inversion\fR <\fIvalue\fR>
Index of the inversion to use. See modelfit(1). The default is 1 (linear single tensor
inversion).

.TP
.B \-schemefile\fR <\fIfile\fR>
The scheme file of the images to be processed using this LUT. 

.TP
.B \-trace\fR <\fIvalue\fR>
Trace of the diffusion tensor(s) used in the test function in the LUT generation. The
default is 2100E-12 m^2 s^-1.

.TP
.B \-acg\fR 
Compute a LUT for the ACG PDF. 

.TP
.B \-bingham\fR 
Compute a LUT for the Bingham PDF. This is the default.

.TP
.B \-watson\fR 
Compute a LUT for the Watson PDF.

.TP
.B \-outputroot\fR <\fIstring\fR>
Prepended onto output file names if multiple luts are selected. If only one LUT is being
computed, this option is ignored and output is sent to stdout or the file specified with
the \fB \%\-outputfile \fR option.

.SH TWO TENSOR OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-cross\fR <\fIangle\fR>
The angle in degrees between the principal directions of the two tensors.

.TP
.B \-prop\fR <\fIf\fR>
The mixing proportion of the two test functions G1 and G2. The synthetic signal is A(q) =
f * G1(q) + (1-f) * G2(q). Default is 0.5.

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
combinetwofibreluts(1), modelfit(1)

.SH BUGS
