.\" $Id: dtpdview.1,v 1.4 2006/05/24 13:14:54 ucacpco Exp $

.TH "dtpdview" 1
.SH NAME
dtpdview \- Visualizes principal directions of diffusion tensors

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B dtpdview
-datadims <\fIx\fR> <\fIy\fR> <\fIz\fR> [-fathresh <\fIthreshold\fR>] -maxcomponents
<\fImax tensors per voxel\fR>

.SH DESCRIPTION
This command acts as a wrapper to the more powerful \fBpdview\fR program. The
\fBpdview\fR program has several additional capabilities. It can load any scalar volume
(\fBdtpdview\fR always uses the fractional anisotropy) and visualise principal directions
extracted with sfpeaks.

The program loads the eigensystem of a diffusion tensor data set and displays the
fractional anisotropy and a 2D projection of the principal directions.

The program reads the eigen decomposition of a diffusion tensor volume, in the format
produced by \fBdteig\fR. One or two tensors per voxel may be displayed. If there are two
tensors in a voxel, the displayed anisotropy is the mean of the two tensor anisotropies.

The default plane view is axial and the user may switch to sagittal or coronal by
clicking the buttons at the top of the screen. Next to the plane selection buttons is the
currently selected slice, with the zoomed area outlined in yellow. Click anywhere on this
image to centre the zoomed area. The main window shows the zoomed area in larger detail.
The principal directions in each voxel are drawn as lines.

The default input data type is double.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-datadims\fR <\fIx\fR> <\fIy\fR> <\fIz\fR>
The dimensions of the image, in voxels.

.TP
.B \-fathresh\fR <\fIvalue\fR>
The fractional anisotropy threshold. The principal direction is not displayed in a voxel
unless the anisotropy is greater than the specified value. The default is 0.

.TP
.B \-maxcomponents\fR <\fImax tensors per voxel\fR>
Maximum number of tensor components in each voxel. The default is 1.

.SH EXAMPLES

Run dteig on a 128x128x60 tensor data set, and view the principal directions.

dteig -inputmodel dt < subjectA.Inv1.Bdouble | dtpdview -datadims 128 128 60

Read data from the file subjectA.Inv1.eig.Bdouble and display principal directions in
white matter.

dtpdview -inputfile subjectA.Inv1.eig.Bdouble -datadims 128 128 60 -fathresh 0.15

Equivalently, use the pdview program (recommended)

pdview -inputfile subjectA.Inv1.eig.Bdouble -inputmodel dteig -datadims 128 128 60
-scalarthresh 0.15 -scalarrange 0 1.

Display principal directions for a multi-tensor volume (see multitenfit(1)).

dteig -inputmodel multitensor < subjectA.Inv32.Bdouble | dtpdview -datadims 128 128 60
-maxcomponents 2

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <p.cook@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
dteig(1), pdview(1)

.SH BUGS
