.\" $Id$

.TH dtspd 1

.SH NAME
dtspd \- Make diffusion tensors semi positive definite.

.SH SYNOPSIS
\fBdtspd\fR -\fB-inputfile\fR <\fIdt\fR> \fB-brainmask\fR <\fImask\fR> \fB-schemefile\fR <\fIfile\fR>
            \fB-outputroot\fR <\fIroot\fR> [\fIoptions\fR]


.SH DESCRIPTION

Takes diffusion tensor output from modelfit and updates tensors. This can either be done by editing the
tensor eigenvalues directly, or attempting to correct / refit the tensor using a constrained fitting
algorithm.

Required inputs are the tensors (in Camino format) and a brain mask. The output is corrected tensors
also in Camino format. A corrected brain mask and diagnostic information are written in NIFTI format.

Optionally, the DWI data can also be provided. This is required to re-fit bad tensors, and also to
produce a count of how many diffusion coefficients (b > 0) appear to be negative (S > mean(S0)).


The exit codes for the output tensors are:

 -100    Bad data flagged by original fit, removed from brain mask
 -2      Attempted Chol fit failed, edited eigenvalues
 -1      Background, nothing done
  0      Good data, nothing done
  2      Original nonlinear fit failed, but eigenvalues non-negative
  6      Bad data modified or excluded in in original fit, but eigenvalues non-negative
  10     Modified tensor by changing eigenvalues
  12     Modified tensor with Cholesky fit (and possibly also edited eigenvalues)

The output eigenvalues should all be positive.



.SH EXAMPLES

  dtspd -inputfile dt.Bdouble -brainmask mask.nii.gz -outputroot fixed_


If we provide the DWI data, we can either re-fit tensors or edit eigenvalues:

  dtspd -inputfile dt.Bdouble -dwifile dwi.nii.gz -schemefile scheme -brainmask mask.nii.gz \
  -editeigenvalues -outputroot fixed_


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-brainmask\fR <\fImask\fR> 
A mask is required, bad data will be masked out. This removes voxels with exit code -100 from
the brain mask. 

.TP
.B \-schemefile\fR <\fIfile\fR> 
Imaging scheme for the data. Required if DWI data is present.

.TP
.B \-dwifile\fR <\fIroi\fR>
DWI data, required to re-fit tensors. May also be provided just to get a count of how often S > S_0.

.TP
.B \-unweightedb\fR <\fImaxUnweightedB\fR> 
Maximum b-value to include as an unweighted measurement. Some imaging schemes have a small non-zero b-value 
for the unweighted measurements. With this option, any b-value less than or equal to the specified value are
treated as b=0.

.TP
.B \-editeigenvalues\fR
Edit the eigenvalues. This is the default if there is no DWI data.

.TP
.B \-fitchol\fR
Replace tensors with negative eigenvalues with the results of a nonlinear fit using the Cholesky
decomposition.

.TP
.B \-winsorizedwi\fR
Clip the DWI intensities such that max(S) = mean(S_0) * 0.9999, before re-fitting the tensor.

.TP
.B \-outputroot\fR <\fIroot\fR> 
Prepended onto output files.



.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH SEE ALSO
modelfit(1)

.SH BUGS
