.\" $Id: fa.1,v 1.7 2006/04/21 13:53:36 ucacpco Exp $

.TH mask 1

.SH NAME
mask \- Creates a background mask from a voxel-ordered DW data file by thresholding the
average b=0 measurement.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mask
[-schemefile <filename> -bgthresh <positive integer>]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads a data file from the acquisition scheme specified in the schemefile. Thresholds the
average b=0 measurement in each voxel and outputs one or zero indicating whether the
average is above the threshold.

.SH EXAMPLES

Create a mask for data file SubjectA.Bfloat:

mask -inputfile SubjectA.Bfloat -schemefile test/A.scheme -bgthresh 200 >
SubjectA_M200.char

or, equivalently,

mask -schemefile test/A.scheme -bgthresh 200 < SubjectA.Bfloat> SubjectA_M200.char

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-inputfile\fR <\fIfile\fR>
Diffusion-weighted MRI data file in voxel order.

.TP
.B \-schemefile\fR <\fIfile\fR>
Schemefile.

.TP
.B \-bgthresh\fR <\fIinteger\fR>
The lower threshold on the average b=0 measurement.

.TP
.B \-csfthresh\fR <\fIinteger\fR>
The upper threshold on the average b=0 measurement.

.TP
.B \-inputdatatype\fR <\fIdata type of input\fR>
Specifies the data type of the input file.  The data type can be any of the following
strings: "char", "short", "int", "long", "float" or "double". See camino(1).

.TP
.B \-outputdatatype\fR <\fIdata type of output\fR>
Specifies the data type of the output data.  The data type can be any of the following
strings: "char", "short", "int", "long", "float" or "double". See camino(1).

.SH AUTHORS
Daniel Alexander <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
trd(1), dtpds(1), dtfit(1), twotenfit(1), threetenfit(1), modelfit(1).

.SH BUGS
Requires the acquisition to have at least one b=0 measurement. However, you can cheat and
create a dummy scheme file with low b measurements set to zero if necessary. Works fine.
