.\" $Id: trd.1,v 1.6 2006/03/14 19:44:24 ucacpco Exp $

.TH trd 1

.SH NAME
md \- Computes the mean diffusivity (trace/3) from diffusion tensors.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B md
[-inputmodel <dt|twotensor|threetensor|multitensor>]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads diffusion tensor (single, two-tensor or three-tensor) data from the standard input,
computes the mean diffusivity, ie trace/3, of each tensor and outputs the results to the
standard output. For multiple-tensor data the program outputs the mean diffusivity of
each tensor, so for three-tensor data, for example, the output contains three values per
voxel.

.SH EXAMPLES

Compute MD in each voxel of diffusion MRI data set SubjectA.Bfloat and store the output
in MD_A.Bdouble:

dtfit SubjectA.Bfloat test/A.scheme | md > MD_A.Bdouble

Compute MD for each component of the two-tensor fit to the same data set:

twotenfit SubjectA.Bfloat test/A.scheme | md -inputmodel twotensor > MD_A.Bdouble

Compute MD for 10000 independent trials of fitting the diffusion tensor to data
synthesized from test function 1 (see datasynth(1)) using imaging scheme A.scheme and
assuming signal to noise ratio of 16 at b=0:

datasynth -testfunc 1 -voxels 10000 -snr 16 -schemefile A.scheme | dtfit - A.scheme | md
> MD_A_SNR16.Bdouble

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-inputmodel\fR <\fImodel type\fR>
Specifies the model that the input data contains parameters for. Possible model types
are: "dt" (diffusion-tensor data), "twotensor" (two-tensor data), "threetensor"
(three-tensor data). By default, the program assumes that the input data contains a
single diffusion tensor in each voxel.

.TP
.B \-inputdatatype\fR <\fIdata type of input\fR>
Specifies the data type of the input file.   The data type can be any of the following
strings: "char", "short", "int", "long", "float" or "double".

.TP
.B \-outputdatatype\fR <\fIdata type of output\fR>
Specifies the data type of the output data.   The data type can be any of the following
strings: "char", "short", "int", "long", "float" or "double". See camino(1).

.SH AUTHORS
Daniel Alexander <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
trd(1), fa(1), dtpds(1), dtfit(1), twotenfit(1), threetenfit(1), modelfit(1).

.SH BUGS
