.\" $Id$

.TH mha2dt 1

.SH NAME
mha2dt \- Converts MetaIO tensors to Camino format.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mha2dt -inputfile [image.mha] [\fB-s0 <\fIfile\fR> | \fB-lns0 <\fIfile\fR>] [\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
This tool converts MetaIO diffusion tensors to Camino format. 

The output is the tensors in Camino voxel ordering: [exit, ln(S0), dxx, dxy, dxz, dyy,
dyz, dzz].

The exit code is set to 0 unless a background mask is supplied, in which case the code is
0 in brain voxels and -1 in background voxels.

The value of ln(S0) in the output is taken from a file if one is supplied, otherwise it
is set to 0.

.SH EXAMPLES

Convert tensors from the file image.mha, applying a brain / background segmentation
including the unweighted signal in the output.

  mha2dt -inputfile image.mha -bgmask mask.mha -lns0 lns0.mha > dt.Bdouble

Alternatively, the output may be piped to any Camino program that takes tensors as input.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-inputfile\fR <\fImetafile\fR>
A meta image file containing diffusion tensors. The tensors are assumed to be in 
upper-triangular order and voxel-ordered.

.TP
.B \-s0\fR <\fIfile\fR>
File containing the unweighted signal for each voxel, may be a raw binary file	(specify
type with \fB\-inputdatatype\fR) or a supported image file.

.TP
.B \-lns0\fR <\fIfile\fR>
File containing the log of the unweighted signal for each voxel, may be a raw binary file
 (specify type with \fB\-inputdatatype\fR) or a supported image file.

.TP
.B \-bgmask\fR <\fImask\fR>
Binary valued brain / background segmentation, may be a raw binary file  (specify type
with \fB\-maskdatatype\fR) or a supported image file.

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"

nii2dt(1)

.SH BUGS
