.\" $Id$

.TH niftiheader 1

.SH NAME
niftiheader \- Read a NIFTI-1 header and print the header attributes.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B niftiheader -readheader <\fIimage file\fR> 

.SH DESCRIPTION

Reads a NIFTI-1 header and outputs the standard header fields as text, or create a new
header.

For explanation of the NIFTI-1 standard, please see http://nifti.nimh.nih.gov/nifti-1

                    

.SH EXAMPLES

Unlike \fBanalyzeheader\fR, we require an output file name to determine header type.

  niftiheader -initfromheader image.nii -qform 1 1 0 0 0 10 20 30 -outputfile newqform.nii



.OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-readheader \fR <\fIfile\fR> 
Reads header information from \fIfile\fR and prints to stdout. If this option is not
specified, then the program writes a header based on the other arguments.

.TP
.B \-initfromheader \fR <\fIfile\fR> 
Uses an existing header to initialize a new header.

.TP
.B \-datatype \fR <\fItype\fR> 
Sets the datatype to a Camino data type. The argument \fItype\fR is a string eg  double,
float, int.

.TP
.B \-intent \fR <\fIcode\fR> 
Sets the intent code.

.TP
.B \-networkbyteorder \fR
Sets the header byte order to network (big-endian).

.TP
.B \-intelbyteorder \fR
Sets the header byte order to intel (little-endian), as used by most PCs and Macs.

.TP
.B \-scaleslope\fR <\fIcode\fR> 
Sets the scale slope.

.TP
.B \-scaleinter\fR <\fIcode\fR> 
Sets the scale intercept.

.TP
.B \-dims\fR <\fIn\fR> <\fIdim1\fR> ... <\fimn\fR> 
Sets the data dimensionality to \fIn\fR dimensions, and sets the size of each. For
example, "-dims 3 128 128 60". The maximum number of dimensions is 7.

.TP
.B \-pixdims\fR <\fIn\fR> <\fIqfac\fR> <\fIdim1\fR> ... <\fimn\fR> 
Sets the pixel dimensions and qfactor.

.TP
.B \-qform\fR <\fIqform_code\fR> <\fIqfac\fR> <\fIquaternb\fR> <\fIquaternc\fR> <\fIquaternd\fR> <\fIqoffset_x\fR> <\fIqoffset_y\fR> <\fIqoffset_z\fR>
Sets the qform parameters.

.TP
.B \-sform\fR <\fIsform_code\fR> <\fIsform_11\fR> <\fIsform_12\fR> ... <\fIsform_44\fR>
Sets the sform code and sform matrix, by row.

.TP
.B \-outputfile\fR <\fIfile\fR>
Sets the output file.

.SH AUTHORS

Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

This program uses some code from the public-domain niftijlib code by Kate Fissell,
University of Pittsburgh.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
dt2nii(1), nii2dt(1)

.SH CAVEATS

The program cannot modify existing headers in place. To modify an existing header, you
would need to do

gunzip image.nii.gz

niftiheader -initfromheader image.nii ... -outputfile tmp.nii

shredder 352 1 0 < image.nii > data.raw

cat tmp.nii data.raw > newImage.nii


NIfTI .nii headers and .hdr headers are not interchangeable. You cannot do the above with
a .hdr file, because it will be missing the extension field (a .nii header is 352 bytes,
not 348 as for .hdr).
