.\" $Id$

.TH nii2dt 1

.SH NAME
nii2dt \- Converts NIFTI-1 tensors to Camino format.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B nii2dt -inputfile [image.nii] [\fB-s0 <\fIfile\fR> | \fB-lns0 <\fIfile\fR>] [\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
This tool converts NIFTI-1 diffusion tensors to Camino format. The program reads the
NIFTI header but does not apply any spatial transformations to the data.

The output is the tensors in Camino voxel ordering: [exit, ln(S0), dxx, dxy, dxz, dyy,
dyz, dzz].

The exit code is set to 0 unless a background mask is supplied, in which case the code is
0 in brain voxels and -1 in background voxels.

The value of ln(S0) in the output is taken from a file if one is supplied, otherwise it
is set to 0.

NOTE FOR FSL USERS - FSL's dtifit can output NIFTI tensors, but they are not stored in
the usual way (which is using NIFTI_INTENT_SYMMATRIX). FSL's tensors follow the ITK / VTK
"upper-triangular" convention, so you will need to use the \fB-uppertriangular\fR option
to convert these correctly.

.SH EXAMPLES

Convert tensors from the file image.nii, applying a brain / background segmentation
including the unweighted signal in the output.

  nii2dt -inputfile image.nii -bgmask mask.nii -lns0 lns0.nii > dt.Bdouble

Alternatively, the output may be piped to any Camino program that takes tensors as input.

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-inputfile\fR <\fIniftifile\fR>
A NIFTI-1 dataset containing diffusion tensors. The tensors are assumed to be in
lower-triangular order as specified by the NIFTI standard for the storage of symmetric
matrices. This file should be either a .nii or a .hdr file.

.TP
.B \-s0\fR <\fIfile\fR>
File containing the unweighted signal for each voxel, may be a raw binary file	(specify
type with \fB\-inputdatatype\fR) or a supported image file.

.TP
.B \-lns0\fR <\fIfile\fR>
File containing the log of the unweighted signal for each voxel, may be a raw binary file
 (specify type with \fB\-inputdatatype\fR) or a supported image file.

.TP
.B \-bgmask\fR <\fImask\fR>
Binary valued brain / background segmentation, may be a raw binary file  (specify type
with \fB\-maskdatatype\fR) or a supported image file.

.TP
.B \-uppertriangular\fR
Specifies input in upper-triangular (VTK style) order. The NIfTI symmatrix intent code
specifies lower triangular, which is the default, this option lets you override that if
needed.

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

This program uses the public-domain niftijlib code by Kate Fissell, University of
Pittsburgh.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
dt2nii(1), metadt2camino(1)

.SH BUGS
