.\" $Id: picocalibdata.1,v 1.3 2006/06/30 14:18:17 ucacpco Exp $

.TH picocalibdata 1

.SH NAME
picocalibdata \- Creates synthetic data for PICo calibration

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B picocalibdata \fR -snr <\fIvalue\fR> -schemefile <\fIfile\fR> 
[\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
picocalibdata generates synthetic diffusion MRI data from a range of test functions,
using the specified acquisition scheme and SNR.

The program is part of the spherical-function PICo calibration routine. To calibrate PICo
for diffusion tensors, see dtlutgen(1).

picocalibdata outputs a single voxel of synthetic data from a range of test functions.
The single-fibre test functions are zero mean Gaussian (see datasynth(1)): G(.; D_1,
tau), where tau is the diffusion time specified in the scheme file, and the tensor is

D_1 = diag((T-l_1)/2, (T-l_1)/2, l_1) .

By default, the program generates data from a range of test functions, where first
eigenvalue l_1 varies such that the fractional anisotropy of D_1 ranges between 0.1 and
0.9. The trace of the tensor is T = 21 * 10^{-10} m^2 s^{-1} by default.

A different random rotation is applied to each D_1, so the test function is oriented
randomly in each voxel.

The two-fibre test functions are

(1-a)*G(.; D_1, tau) + (a)*G(.; D_2, tau) ,

where 0.5 < a <= 1. The tensor D_2 is

D_2 = R^T * diag((T-m_1)/2, m_1, (T-m_1)/2) * R ,

where R is a rotation matrix, which specifies a rotation by an angle theta about the
second eigenvector of D_1, so that the angle between the principal directions of D_1 and
D_2 is (pi / 2 - theta).

By default, picocalibdata creates data from the two-fibre test function with many
combinations of D_1 and D_2, such that the fractional anisotropy of D_1 and D_2 vary
between 0.3 and 0.9, the angle theta varies between 0 and pi / 4, and the mixing
parameter a varies between 0.5 and 0.8. A random rotation is applied to each test
function before the data is generated.

The program outputs a text file containing information about the test functions used to
generate the data. By default, this file is pico_calibration_info.txt.

.SH EXAMPLES

Use the default parameters to generate data for a given scheme file, with an SNR of 20 in
white matter in the unweighted image

picocalibdata -snr 20 -schemefile A.scheme > calib_data


Increase the range of single-fibre test functions and output text file to another
location

picocalibdata -snr 20 -schemefile A.scheme -onedtfarange 0.1 0.9 -infooutputfile
A_pico_calib.txt > calib_data

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-onedtfarange\fR <\fImin max\fR>
Fractional anisotropy range of single-tensor test functions. Default is 0.1 0.9.

.TP
.B \-onedtfastep\fR <\fIsize\fR>
The anisotropy of the single-tensor test functions increase  in units of \fIsize\fR from
the minimum to the maximum. Default is 5E-4.


TP

.B \-twodtfarange\fR <\fImin max\fR>
Fractional anisotropy range of two-tensor test functions. Default is 0.3 0.9.

.TP
.B \-twodtfastep\fR <\fIsize\fR>
The anisotropy of the two-tensor test functions increase  in units of \fIstep\fR from the
minimum to the maximum. Default is 1E-2. Data is generated for each pair of tensors
within the FA range - so if there are N steps of \fIsize\fR from the minimum to maximum
FA, then there will be N(N+1)/2 combinations of tensor anisotropy in the two-tensor test
functions.

.TP
.B \-twodtanglerange\fR <\fImin max\fR>
The minimum and maximum rotation angle to apply to the second diffusion tensor, in
radians. The angle between the principal directions of the diffusion tensors is pi / 2 -
angle. The default range is 0 pi / 4.

.TP
.B \-twodtanglesstep\fR <\fIsize\fR>
The rotation angle for the second diffusion tensor increases in units of \fIsize\fR.

.TP
.B \-twodtmixmax\fR <\fImax\fR>
Maximum mixing parameter a, for two-tensor test functions:  p = (1-a)*G(.; D_1, tau) +
(a)*G(.; D_2, tau). Should be between 0.5 and 1.0. The minimum value of a is 1.0 - max.

.TP
.B \-twodtmixstep\fR <\fIsize\fR>
The mixing parameter increases in units of \fIsize\fR.

.TP
.B \-snr\fR <\fIvalue\fR>
The signal to noise ratio of the unweighted (q = 0) measurements.

.TP
.B \-trace\fR <\fIvalue\fR>
Trace of the diffusion tensor(s) used in the test functions. The default is 2100E-12 m^2
s^-1.

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
datasynth(1)

.SH BUGS
