.\" $Id$

.TH pointset2scheme 1

.SH NAME
pointset2scheme \- Creates scheme files from point sets.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B pointset2scheme \fR [\fIoptions\fR]

 
.SH DESCRIPTION

This program reads gradient directions and produces a scheme file. It will read files in
the text format found in camino/PointSets/Elec???.txt:

 <N>
 <point 1 x>
 <point 1 y>
 <point 1 z>
 ...
 <point N z>

Alternatively, the program can read files in the format:

 <N>
 <point 1 x> <point 1 y> <point 1 z>
 ...
 <point N x> <point N y> <point N z>

with or without the number of points specified at the top of the file. Gradient
directions will be normalized to unit length if non-zero.

The program will also read FSL gradient directions in the format

 <point 1 x> <point 2 x> ... <point N x>
 <point 1 x> <point 2 y> ... <point N y>
 <point 1 x> <point 2 y> ... <point N z>

but it does not read the FSL bvals file. To convert FSL bvecs / bvals file to Camino
format, see fsl2scheme(1). This program permits you to define new schemes using gradient
directions from FSL.

Normally, directions will have unit magnitude. If this is not the case, you need to
determine whether your scanner incorporates the gradient direction magnitude into account
when calculating the diffusion gradients. See the \fB-usegradmod\fR option.


The program produces a scheme file appropriate to the supplied imaging parameters.

.SH SCHEME FORMATS

Additional details concerning imaging schemes may be found under SCHEME FILES in
camino(1). This section is a quick guide to specifying scheme files using
\fBpointset2scheme\fR. This program assumes that measurements either apply zero diffusion
weighting, or a fixed non-zero diffusion weighting. If this is not the case, it may be
easier to write the scheme by hand.

For all schemes created using this program, "zero" measurements, ie those with zero
diffusion weighting, should have zero gradient directions.

The simplest scheme format is BVECTOR (formerly called version "2"). This has the form

 VERSION: BVECTOR
 <x_1> <y_1> <z_1> <b_1>
 ...
 <x_N> <y_N> <z_N> <b_N>

where [x_i y_i z_i] is a gradient direction and b_i the corresponding b-value.

To create this scheme file, you need only specify the b-value with the \fB-bvalue\fR
option. All non-zero gradient directions will have the specified b-value, and zero
gradients will have a zero b-value.

The STEJSKALTANNER scheme format is a fully-specified Stejskal-Tanner sequence (formerly
version "1"). Its file format is

 VERSION: STEJSKALTANNER
 <x_1> <y_1> <z_1> <|G|_1> <DELTA_1> <delta_1> <TE_1>
 ...
 <x_N> <y_N> <z_N> <|G|_N> <DELTA_N> <delta_N> <TE_N>

where |G| is the gradient strength, DELTA is the pulse separation, delta is the pulse
duration, and TE is the echo time for the measurement. To create a scheme file in this
format, use the \fB-dwparams\fR option and pass (in order) <|G|> <DELTA> <delta> <TE_1>.
All non-zero measurements will share these parameters. Zero measurements will have zero
|G|, DELTA, and delta, but the same TE.

The TRSE scheme format is a fully-specified twice-refocused spin-echo sequence (formerly
version "3"). Its file format is

 VERSION: TRSE
 <x_1> <y_1> <z_1> 
 ...
 <x_N> <y_N> <z_N> <|G|>, <del1>, <t_del1>, <del2>, <t_del2>, <del3>, <t_del4>, <TE>

where t_del is the onset and del the duration of a pulse, and there are four pulses per
measurement. Details of this scheme may be found in Reese et al, Magn Reson Med, 49(1),
177-82, 2003. This scheme is created by specifying \fB-dwparams\fR followed by (in order)
<|G|> <del1> <t_del1> <del2> <t_del2> <del3> <t_del4> <TE>. Zero measurements will have
everything but TE set to zero.

The scheme version "0" has been deprecated; it is no longer possible to create scheme
files in that format. Existing scheme files can still be read by Camino programs that
take the \fB\-schemefile\fR option.

.SH INCLUDING ZERO MEASUREMENTS

Zero measurements may be placed anywhere in the scheme. A zero measurement is defined as
one where the gradient direction is [0 0 0]. If any direction in the input point set is
zero, then all diffusion-weighting parameters are also zero for that measurement.
Additional zero measurements may be prepended onto the scheme with the \fB-addzeromeas\fR
option.

.SH COMMENTS

Comments in scheme files are any line beginning with #.

.SH UNITS FOR IMAGING PARAMETERS

The units of the measurements in the scheme file determine the units of the output. By
default, Camino prefers to use SI: meters, seconds, Tesla. Other units are permitted, but
this will affect the output of Camino programs, and may require you to enter additional
options. For the purposes of diffusion tensor reconstruction, non-standard units will
scale the diffusion tensors in the output. Thus if you use a BVECTOR scheme with b-values
specified in s / mm^2, your diffusivities will be in units of mm^2 / s. Other programs
may work with non-standard units if additional options are specified. Check the relevant
man page before using non-SI units with camino programs.

.SH EXAMPLES

Create a scheme file with 30 measurements at b= 1000 s / mm^2 = 1E9 s / m^2, with 3
unweighted measurements followed by the 30 diffusion-weighted measurements. Gradient
directions are chosen from the Camino point sets, which are optimised by electrostatic
energy minimization (Jansons and Alexander, Inverse Problems, 19:1031-1046, 2003). Many
pre-computed point sets are stored in the camino/PointSets directory.

  pointset2scheme -bvalue 1E9 -addzeromeas 3 < PointSets/Elec030.txt > M3_N30_b1000.scheme

Same thing, only this time we use a file points.txt that already contains the vector [0 0
0] for the zero measurements. Note that the zero measurements may appear anywhere in the
file, the b-value for these measurements will be set to zero.

  pointset2scheme -bvalue 1E9 -inputfile points.txt > M3_N30_b1000.scheme

Create a scheme where all measurements are repeated to improve SNR.

  pointset2scheme -bvalue 1E9 -inputfile points.txt -numscans 2 > M3_N30_b1000_S2.scheme

Create the same thing, but acquire the repeat measurements sequentially, rather than in a
block, so the measurements go [direction 0, direction 0, direction 1, direction
1,...,direction 32] rather than [direction 0, direction 1,..,direction 32, direction 0,
direction 1,..,direction 32]

  pointset2scheme -bvalue 1E9 -inputfile points.txt -numscans 2 -interleave > M3_N30_b1000_S2_interleave.scheme

Use a Camino point set, this time for 60 directions, and specify Stejskal-Tanner sequence
parameters.

  
  pointset2scheme -version STEJSKALTANNER -dwparams 0.022 0.04 0.025 0.072 -addzeromeas 6 -inputfile PointSets/Elec060.txt > M6_N60_ST.scheme

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-version\fR <\fIVERSION\fR>
Version of scheme file to produce. The default is BVECTOR. Options are BVECTOR,
STEJSKALTANNER, TRSE.

.TP
.B \-bvalue\fR <\fIb\fR>
B-value for all measurements. Applies only to BVECTOR schemes. This is an alias for
\fB-dwparams\fR \fIb\fR.

.TP
.B \-dwparams\fR <\fIparam1 param2 ... paramN\fR>
The diffusion-weighting parameters for each non-zero measurement.  The required
parameters for each scheme version are

 Version		Parameters

 BVECTOR                b
 STEJSKALTANNER         |g| DELTA delta TE
 TRSE                   |g| del1 t_del1 del2 t_del2 del3 t_del4 TE

.TP
.B \-addzeromeas\fR <\fInumber\fR>
Prepend \fInumber\fR of zero measurements to the scheme. Zero measurements are added
before	any repeats are encoded, so these measurements are also repeated.

.TP
.B \-numscans\fR <\fInumber\fR>
Number of scans, which is the total number of times that the input point set (including
any prepended zero measurements) should appear in the scheme file. The default is 1.

.TP
.B \-interleave\fR
Interleaves the scans. Useful only if the number of scans is greater than 1. If the input
point set contains gradient directions [0, 1, 2,...,N], then \fB-numscans\fR \fI2\fR
produces output in order [0, 1,...,N, 0, 1,...,N]. \fB-numscans\fR \fI2\fR
\fB-interleave\fR gives [0, 0, 1, 1,...,N, N].

.TP
.B \-flipx\fR 
Negate the x component of all the vectors in the input.

.TP
.B \-flipy\fR 
Negate the y component of all the vectors in the input.

.TP
.B \-flipz\fR 
Negate the z component of all the vectors in the input.

.TP
.B \-usegradmod\fR 
This uses the gradient direction magnitude to scale b. Some scanners will factor  the
gradient magnitude into the b-value. If the gradient directions have magnitude |g| =
sqrt(g_x^2 + g_y^2 + g_z^2), and the nominal b-value is beta, then the actual b-value is
beta * |g|^2. If this option is used, the gradient directions will still be normalized to
unity in the output, and the b-value will be scaled appropriately. It is only used for
BVECTOR schemes.

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
camino(1), fsl2scheme(1)

.SH BUGS
