.\" $Id$

.TH procstreamlines 1

.SH NAME
procstreamlines \- Process streamline data

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B procstreamlines 
[\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION

This program does post-processing of streamline output from \fBtrack\fR. It can either
output streamlines or connection probability maps.

.SH SEEDS, WAYPOINTS, EXCLUSION ROIS, ENDPOINT ROIS AND TARGETS

The seed file, the waypoint file, the exclusion file, the endpoint file and the target
file determine where streamlines start, where they may go, where they may not go, and how
they are interpreted as connection probabilities.

All of these files should be NIFTI-1 images of the same dimension as the seed
file. They may have any data type, but should be integer valued, and the maximum value in
these files must not exceed 2^31 - 1 (the maximum representable by a signed 32-bit
integer).

Voxels that share the same positive intensity are considered part of the same ROI, they
do not have to be contiguous. Voxels that are zero or negative are considered background.

The physical space of these images should be the same as the diffusion image from which
the streamlines were generated.

These images should all share a consistent voxel space, but this shared space doesn't
have to be the same as the underlying diffusion space. This means, for example, that you
can use seed files of higher resolution than the diffusion data, and then produce results
in the high-resolution space with this program.

Streamlines are tested against waypoints, targets etc pointwise, so it is important to
ensure that the streamlines have sufficient spatial resolution for your needs. This is
especially important for FACT tracking, where one point is placed in each voxel traversed
by the streamline in the diffusion space, so the distance between points may be as large
as the longest span across a voxel. If you perform further processing in a different
voxel space, you should use the \fB-resamplestepsize\fR option to increase the streamline
resolution.

.SH SEED FILE

The seed file contains the regions of interest for tracking. Streamlines are seeded at
the centre of all voxels with an intensity greater than zero.

.SH WAYPOINT FILE

The waypoint file constrains streamlines to pass through certain volumes within the
image. Waypoints are defined in the same way as ROIs, each intensity value (apart from
zero) defines a different waypoint. Streamlines will be discarded unless they intersect
one or more voxels in each waypoint.

.SH EXCLUSION FILE

The exclusion file constrains streamlines to not pass through any volume marked with an
intensity greater than zero. Streamlines that enter such regions will be discarded
(default) or truncated (with \fB-truncateinexclusion\fR).

.SH TARGET FILE

The target file is only used for PICo connection probability calculation. For PICo
tracking without a target image, the output is the connection probability of each voxel
to the seed, which is the fraction of streamlines that intersect the voxel. With targets,
the connection probability to all voxels in the target is the fraction of streamlines
that intersect any voxel in the target. For example, if the thalamus is segmented in the
target image, then the connection probability to all voxels in the thalamus would be the
fraction of streamlines that connect to anywhere in the thalamus. If we wanted to know
the distribution of connections within the thalamus, we would pass the thalamus
segmentation as a waypoint file but we would not use a target image. Then the output
would be a connection probability to all voxels in the image, but only streamlines that
connect to the thalamus would be used in the probability calculation.

.SH ENDPOINT FILE

Endpoint ROIs have some properties of waypoints and some properties of exclusion ROIs. If
an endpoint ROI image is supplied with the \fB-endpointfile\fR option, the program
outputs only the streamlines that project from the seed point to two distinct endpoint
ROIs. The seed point itself may count as one endpoint if it is inside a labeled region. 

A streamline is retained if and only if:

  1. It connects two different endpoint ROIs.
  2. The segment connecting these two ROIs includes the seed point.

If the streamline does connect to two different endpoint ROIs, then it is truncated. 
The output is the shortest section of the streamline that connects two endpoint ROIs and 
includes the seed point.

The major differences between using end zones and a combination of exclusion / waypoints
are:

  1. All waypoints must be intersected but only two endpoint ROIs must be intersected. 

  2. The section of streamline that connects the endpoint ROIs must include the seed point. 
     With waypoints, any portion of the streamline may intersect the waypoint. 

  3. If the seed point is within an exclusion ROI, the streamline is truncated or excluded. If
     the seed point is within an endpoint ROI, the streamline is truncated only when it intersects
     another endpoint ROI.

.SH ORDER OF PROCESSING

The program performs the various operations on each input streamline in the following
order:

 * The streamline is truncated to the maximum length, if specified.
 * Exclusion ROIs are applied.
 * Waypoints are applied.
 * Endpoint ROIs are applied.

The streamline may be discarded if it does not connect end points, does not intersect
waypoints, or enters an exclusion ROI. It may be truncated if it enters an exclusion ROI
(with \fB-truncateinexclusion\fR) or if it extends beyond the endpoint ROIs.

If the streamline is not discarded, then it is sent to the output or used to construct a
PICo connectivity map.

Any operation that discards or truncates streamlines modify the PICo connection
probabilities. Streamlines that are discarded do not figure in the calculation of
connection probability. For example, if we seed 1000 streamlines and then discard 100
that do not enter all waypoints, the connection probability of each voxel to the seed is
(number of streamlines entering voxel) / 900.

.SH OUTPUT

The output is either the streamlines themselves, or connection probability images (these
images may be processed further with \fBimagestats\fR).

Streamline output is identical to that from \fBtrack\fR; see the options for streamline
output in track(1). If a seed file and an outputroot are specified, output is segregated
by region of interest. That is, streamlines from all seed points with the same label are
grouped together. Otherwise, output is to a single file or to stdout.


.SH OUTPUT OF ANATOMICAL CONNECTIVITY MAPS

The \fB-outputacm\fR option takes all input streamlines and produces an image where
each voxel contains the number of streamlines entering that voxel. If \fB-outputcp\fR is also
specified, the values are divided by the total number of streamlines in the input. This
output format is similar to that produced by FSL's probtrack.

The \fB-outputacm\fR option is named after the "anatomical connectivity map" (ACM)
(Embleton et al, Proc ISMRM 2007, 1548). To build an ACM, seed tractography at every
voxel in brain gray / white matter, then run \fBprocstreamlines\fR with this option.

Because the ACM combines all streamlines into a single image, it is not necessary to
specify the seed points or the number of iterations, and it is fine to process the input
streamlines multiple times by calling \fBprocstreamlines\fR with different options.

If a target file is specified, the ACM is constructed as a target probability image,
each target ROI is labeled by the number of streamlines entering the ROI.


.SH OUTPUT OF VOXELWISE CONNECTION PROBABILITY IMAGES

Without \fB-outputacm\fR, or a target image, output is separately produced for each
seed point.

The output is (using bash syntax):

   ${outputRoot}${region}_${seed point}_${pd}.{ext}

Where the region is the numerical index of the ROI in the seed file, the seed points are
numbered from 1 in the order in which they are processed by \fBtrack\fR, and the pd is
the principal direction that the streamlines follow at the seed point. If there are P
principal directions at each seed point, then a separate image is generated for pd 1
through P.

If \fB\-outputsc\fR is specified, then the output contains raw streamline counts, ie the
number of streamlines that enter each voxel. If \fB\-outputcp\fR is specified, the
streamline counts are normalized by the total number of streamlines. The data type of the
images is 32-bit int.

.SH OUTPUT OF TARGET CONNECTION PROBABILITY IMAGES

With a target image, output is

   ${outputRoot}_${region}_${seed point}_${pd}_0.{ext}

Either \fB\-outputcp\fR or \fB\-outputsc\fR may be specified with the target file. The
default is \fB\-outputsc\fR, which means results are not normalized by the total number
of streamlines used to compose the image (which may vary from seed to seed due to
filtering by waypoints etc).

.SH EXAMPLES

Track all fibres from an ROI drawn by hand on the mid-sagittal plane. The ROI contains
corpus callosum fibres at the mid-sagittal plane.

  track -inputfile dt.nii.gz -inputmodel dt -outputroot cc_ -seedfile ccROI.nii.gz > cc.Bfloat

Apply an end point file cortex.nii.gz, which contains labeled cortical regions

  procstreamlines -endpointfile cortex.nii.gz > corticalConnections.Bfloat

The output is now only tracts that connect two different cortical regions.


.SH OPTIONS

The tracts are read and written in physical space, the mapping between voxel and physical space is usually
inferred from the input (eg a seed image), but if no input images are used, use \fB-header\fR to specify a
reference image that has the same physical space as the diffusion data.

.SH DATA OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-mintractpoints\fR <\fIminpoints\fR>

Streamlines that consist of fewer than \fIminpoints\fR will be discarded.

.TP
.B \-mintractlength\fR <\fIminlength\fR>

Streamlines are discarded if their length is less than \fIminlength\fR mm.

.TP
.B \-maxtractpoints\fR <\fImaxpoints\fR>

Streamlines that consist of more than \fImaxpoints\fR will be truncated to \fImaxpoint\fR
in length. Specifying this option will automatically disable resampling of tracts.

.TP
.B \-maxtractlength\fR <\fImaxlength\fR>

Streamlines longer than \fImaxlength\fR mm will be truncated. This calculation is done
before resampling, so the truncation is accurate to the original resolution of the tract.

.SH SEED OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-seedfile\fR <\fIfile.[hdr | nii | mha | mhd]\fR>
Image containing seed points. If an output root is specified, the output  is grouped
according to the intensity of the seed in this image.

.TP
.B \-regionindex \fR <\fIindex\fR>
Process the specified region in the seed file. This index refers to a particular label
intensity in the seed file.

.SH OTHER OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-targetfile\fR <\fIfile\fR>
Image containing target volumes. Targets are defined as regions of the image with the
same intensity. If this option is given, the PICo maps will only localise connection
probability to the volumes bounded by the targets. The connection probability to a target
from a seed is the fraction of streamlines that pass anywhere within the target volume.

.TP
.B \-allowmultitargets\fR
Allows streamlines to connect to multiple target volumes. By default, the program only
counts the first entry to a target volume.

.TP
.B \-waypointfile\fR <\fIfile.[hdr | nii | mha | mhd]\fR>
Image containing waypoints. Waypoints are defined as regions of the image with the same
intensity, where 0 is background and any value > 0 is a waypoint. Streamlines are
discarded if they do not pass through at least one voxel of each waypoint volume.

.TP
.B \-truncateloops\fR
This option allows streamlines to enter a waypoint exactly once. After the streamline
leaves the waypoint, it is truncated upon a second entry to the waypoint. For the
purposes of this operation, the streamline is divided into two segments at the seed
point. Each segment is allowed to enter each waypoint once and the segment is truncated
at a second entry.

.TP
.B \-discardloops\fR
This option allows streamlines to enter a waypoint exactly once. After the streamline
leaves the waypoint, the entire streamline is discarded upon a second entry to the
waypoint. For the purposes of this operation, the streamline is divided into two segments
at the seed point. Each segment is allowed to enter each waypoint once and the entire
streamline is discarded if either segment enters a waypoint twice.

.TP
.B \-exclusionfile\fR <\fIfile.[hdr | nii | mha | mhd]\fR>
Image containing exclusion ROIs. By default, exclusion ROIs are  treated as
anti-waypoints - streamlines that enter any exclusion ROI are discarded. if the
\fB-truncateinexclusion\fR option is given, streamlines are truncated upon entry to an
exclusion ROI, but not discarded.

.TP
.B \-truncateinexclusion\fR
Retain segments of a streamline before entry to an exclusion ROI. If this is not
specified, streamlines that enter an exclusion ROI are discarded.

.TP
.B \-endpointfile\fR <\fIfile.[hdr | nii | mha | mhd]\fR>
Image containing endpoint ROIs. Endpoint ROIs are defined as regions of the image with
the same intensity, where 0 is background and any value > 0 is an endpoint ROI.
Streamlines are discarded if they do not connect two different endpoint ROIs.

.TP
.B \-resamplestepsize\fR <\fIsize\fR>
Each point on a streamline is tested for entry into target, exclusion or waypoint
volumes. If the length between points on a tract is not much smaller than the voxel
length, then streamlines may pass through part of a voxel without being counted. If this
option is not present, no resampling is done by default.

.TP
.B \-iterations
Number of streamlines generated for each seed. Only required for voxelwise images. 


.SH OUTPUT OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-gzip
Compress output using the gzip algorithm.

.TP
.B \-outputtracts\fR 

Output streamlines in raw binary format.

.TP
.B \-outputcp\fR
Output the connection probability map, normalized by the number of streamlines used
to build the output image.

.TP
.B \-outputsc\fR
Output raw streamline counts.

.TP
.B \-outputacm\fR
Combine all tracts in the input into a single output image.  Outputs a
single image where each voxel contains the number of streamlines that enter the voxel. If
\fB-outputcp\fR is also specified, the values are divided by the total number of
streamlines in the input.

.TP
.B \-outputroot\fR <\fIstring\fR>
Prepended onto all output file names. If the output is streamlines, then using this 
option tells the program to separate streamlines by ROI.

.TP
.B \-outputdatatype\fR <\fItype\fR>
Sets the data type of images (default float). Tracts are always output as float.
Acceptable values vary by image format, but you should be safe with "short", "float",
"int", "double".

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
track(1), imagestats(1), vtkstreamlines(1)

.SH BUGS

Although input and output of tracts is done in physical space, tracts are converted
internally into voxel space for processing. This can introduce small deltas in the tract
geometry. These precision errors are small but they might upset algorithms that look for
exact pointwise correspondences.


Note that you cannot filter streamlines and output to the same file with a command like

  cat streamlines.Bfloat | procstreamlines [args] > streamlines.Bfloat

If you do this, the streamlines file will be lost.
