.\" $Id: qballmx.1,v 1.3 2006/04/20 12:54:35 ucacdxa Exp $

.TH qballmx 1
.SH NAME
qballmx \- Creates a reconstruction matrix for Q-Ball 

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B qballmx -schemefile \fR <\fIfilename\fR>
.SH DESCRIPTION
Generates a reconstruction matrix for Q-Ball. Used to reconstruct data acquired with the
scheme specified in <scheme file> using linrecon.

.SH EXAMPLES
Generates a linear inversion matrix for the scheme A.scheme using:

# Create a linear transform matrix for Q-Ball. This command uses the default setting of
rbf sigma = 0.2618 (15 degrees), data smoothing sigma = 0.1309 (7.5 degrees), rbf
pointset 246

qballmx -schemefile A.scheme > A_QBALLMX.Bdouble

The settings used for the basis functions are displayed using the error stream. It is
advised that you save these settings for future reference.

Further examples:

 1. Using Radial Basis Functions
 # Create the inversion matrix
 qballmx -schemefile A.scheme -basistype rbf -rbfpointset 246 -rbfsigma 0.2618 -smoothingsigma 0.1309 > A_QBALLMX.Bdouble
 
 # Run it over each voxel
 linrecon SubjectA.Bfloat A.scheme A_QBALLMX.Bdouble -normalize > QBallCoeffsA.Bdouble

2. Using Spherical Harmonics

 # Create the inversion matrix
 qballmx -schemefile A.scheme -basistype sh -order 4 > A_QBALLMX.Bdouble

 # Run it over each voxel
 linrecon SubjectA.Bfloat A.scheme A_QBALLMX.Bdouble -normalize > QBallCoeffsA.Bdouble

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
General options:

.TP
.B \-basistype\fR <\fIbasis function type\fR>

		rbf - use radial basis functions				sh - use
spherical harmonics

.TP
.B \-schemefile\fR <\fIScheme file name\fR>
See modelfit(1).

.TP
Specific to radial basis functions (rbf):

.TP
.B \-rbfpointset\fR <\fIpointset to use\fR>
		sets the number of radial basis functions to use.  The value specified
must be present in the Pointsets directory.  The default value is 246

.TP
.B \-rbfsigma\fR <\fIrbf width\fR>
		sets the width of the basis functions used for interpolation.  If not
specified, a default value of 0.2618 is used.	  

.TP
.B \-smoothingsigma\fR <\fIrbf width\fR>
		sets the width of the basis functions used to smooth the data.	If this
flag is omitted, a default value of 0.1309 is used.	

.TP
Specific to spherical harmonics (sh):

.TP
.B \-order\fR <\fImaximum order\fR>
		maximum order of the spherical harmonic series	

.SH "SEE ALSO"
linrecon(1).

.SH BUGS
