.\" $Id: scanner2voxel.1,v 1.3 2005/09/26 10:36:44 ucacpco Exp $

.TH scanner2voxel 1

.SH NAME
scanner2voxel \- Converts scanner-order data to voxel-order data.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B scanner2voxel
-voxels <number of voxels> -components <measurements per voxel> [\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Converts scanner order data files into the voxel order required by the Camino toolkit.
Scanner-order data-files store the whole volume of the first measurement followed by the
whole volume of the second measurement followed by the whole volume of subsequent
measurements. Analyze format diffusion MRI data files are commonly in scanner order.
Voxel-order data files store all of the measurements for the first voxel followed by all
the measurements for the second voxel followed by all measurements for subsequent voxels.

By default, the input and output data type is big-endian float.

This program deals with raw data only. If endian conversion is required, use \fBshredder\fR. If 
the data has a header, use \fBimage2voxel\fR - which will take care of input endian / type conversion 
as needed.

.SH EXAMPLES
Convert scanner order data file ScannerOrder.img, for which the measurement volume has
size 128x128x60 and the acquisition scheme acquires 6 measurements with b=0 and 54
diffusion-weighted measurements, to voxel order:

scanner2voxel -voxels 983040 -components 60 < ScannerOrder.img > VoxelOrder.Bfloat

Equivalently:

scanner2voxel -voxels 983040 -components 60 -inputfile ScannerOrder.img >
VoxelOrder.Bfloat

Fit the diffusion tensor to the scanner-order data in ScannerOrder.img assuming the
acquisition scheme is specified in A.scheme:

scanner2voxel -voxels 983040 -components 60 < ScannerOrder.img | dtfit - A.scheme
-nonlinear > DiffTensorA.Bdouble

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-voxels\fR <number of voxels>
The number of voxels in the input data.

.TP
.B \-components\fR <number of measurements>
The number of measurements per voxel.

.TP
.B \-inputfile\fR <\fIinput filename\fR>
The name of the input file.

.TP
.B \-inputdatatype\fR <\fIdata type of input\fR>
Specifies the data type of the input file.  The data type can be any of the following
strings: "char", "short", "int", "long", "float" or "double".

.TP
.B \-outputdatatype\fR <\fIdata type of output\fR>
Specifies the data type of the output data.  The data type can be any of the following
strings: "char", "short", "int", "long", "float" or "double".

.SH "AUTHORS"
Daniel Alexander <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
image2voxel(1), shredder(1), voxel2scanner(1)

.SH BUGS
