
.TH selectshells 1

.SH NAME
selectshells \- Select shells of diffusion data over a specified range of b-values

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B selectshells 
\fB\-inputfile\fR <\fIdata\fR> \fB\-schemefile\fR <\fIscheme\fR> \fB\-maxbval\fR <\fImax\fR>
\fB\-outputroot\fR <\fIroot\fR> [\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION

Select shells of a DWI image between a specified minimum and maximum b-value. This is useful for 
getting subsets of multi-shell data that are useful for particular analysis. For example, for DTI,
measurements in the range of b=500 s / mm^2 to b=1500 s / mm^2 are usually preferred.

A common use case is to remove high b-value shells where non-Gaussian diffusion dominates. A minimum 
b-value can also be applied, to select larger shells for multi-fibre models. By default the b=0 
measurements are included even if a minimum b-value is applied. 


.SH EXAMPLES

Select data at b=3000 only, without b=0 data:

  selectshells -inputfile data.nii.gz -schemefile multiShell.scheme -minbval 2900 -maxbval 3100 -removezeromeas


Select the b=1000 shell from some Human Connectome project data, with the unweighted (b=5) data:

  selectshells -inputfile data.nii.gz -schemefile multiShell.scheme -minbval 800 -maxbval 1200 -unweightedb 10


Note that we use a range of values around the desired nominal shell b-value. This is because the actual gradient 
applied is often different from the nominal value, and thus the b-values in each subject's scheme file will vary.


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-schemefile\fR <\fIscheme\fR>
Scheme file in Camino format.

.TP
.B \-minbval\fR <\fImin\fR> 
Minimum b-value to include in the output. Default 0. In the same units as the scheme file. b=0 measurements
are treated as a special case and are not removed unless the \fB-removezeromeas\fR flag is passed.

.TP
.B \-maxbval\fR <\fImax\fR> 
Maximum b-value to include in the output. Default infinity (include all b-values). In the same units as 
the scheme file.

.TP
.B \-unweightedb\fR <\fImaxUnweightedB\fR> 
Maximum b-value to include as an unweighted measurement. Some imaging schemes have a small non-zero b-value 
for the unweighted measurements. With this option, any b-value less than or equal to the specified value are
treated as b=0.

.TP
.B \-removezeromeas\fR
If this flag is present, b=0 measurements are not selected. By default they are selected even if a minimum
b-value is specified.

.TP
.B \-outputroot\fR <\fIroot\fR> 
Root of output files, selected shells of DWI data are output along with the associated scheme file. Output
file format will be the same as the input (NIFTI or raw).



.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
camino(1)

.SH BUGS
