.TH "sflutgen" 1
.SH NAME
sflutgen \- Generates PICo lookup tables (LUT) for multi-fibre methods such as PASMRI and
Q-Ball.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sflutgen
-infofile <\fIfilename\fR> -outputfilestem <\fIfilename stem\fR> [\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
sflutgen creates the lookup tables for the generalized multi-fibre implementation of the
PICo tractography algorithm.  The outputs of this program are either surface or line
coefficients up to a given order.  The calibration can be performed for different
distributions, such as the Bingham and Watson distributions.

.SH EXAMPLES
This methods uses data from the sfpicocalibdata program for calibration.  The data is
then reconstructed and the fibre-orientation estimates are calculated.	The example below
uses PASMRI to reconstruct and stores a maximum of 3 fibre-orientation estimates 

 sfpicocalibdata -schemefile A.scheme -infooutputfile A.info > PICo_data.Bfloat
 mesd -schemefile A.scheme -filter PAS 1.4 < PICo_data.Bfloat | sfpeaks -inputmodel maxent -filter PAS 1.4 > PAS_Peaks.Bdouble

Once the calibration data has been calculated, lut's can be generated using the command

sflutgen -infofile A.info -outputstem PAS_lut < PAS_Peaks.Bdouble

This command is equavalent to

sflutgen -infofile A.info -outputstem PAS_lut -pdf bingham < PAS_Peaks.Bdouble

These commands will give you two lut's, one called PAS_lut_oneFibreSurfaceCoeffs.Bdouble
and the other called PAS_lut_twoFibreSurfaceCoeffs.Bdouble

Each of these files contains big-endian doubles as standard. The format of the output is:

 dimensions	(1 for Watson, 2 for Bingham)
 order		(the order of the polynomial)
 coefficient_1
 coefficient_2
 ...
 coefficient_N

In the case of the Watson, there is a single set of coefficients, which are ordered:
constant, x, x^2, ..., x^order. In the case of the Bingham, there are two sets of
coefficients (one for each surface), ordered so that

 for j = 1 to order
    for k = 1 to order
	 coeff_i = x^j * y^k

 where j+k < order

.SH OPTIONS
sflutgen flags

.TP
.B \-inputfile\fR <\fIinput filename\fR>
See modelfit(1).

.TP
.B \-outputfilestem\fR <\fIoutput filename\fR>
This option allows you to define the name of the generated luts.  The form of the
filenames will be [stem]_oneFibreLUT.Bdouble and [stem]_twoFibreLUT.Bdouble

.TP
.B \-pdf\fR  <\fIwatson\fR | \fIbingham\fR>
Sets the distribution to use for the calibration.  The default is the Bingham
distribution, which allows elliptical probability density contours.  Currently supported
options are:

bingham - The Bingham distributionn, which allows elliptical probability density
contours.

watson - The Watson distribution. This distribution is rotationally symmetric.

.TP
.B \-binincsize\fR <\fIbin increment size\fR>
Sets the size of the bins.  In the case of 2D histograms such as the Bingham, the bins
are always square.  Default is 1.

.TP
.B \-minvectsperbin\fR <\fIminimum direction vectors per bin\fR>
Specifies the minimum number of fibre-orientation estimates a bin must contain before it
is used in the lut line/surface generation.  Default is 50.  If you get the error "no
fibre-orientation estimates in histogram!", the calibration data set is too small to get
enough samples in any of the histogram bins.  You can decrease the minimum number per bin
to get things running in quick tests, but the statistics will not be reliable and for
serious applications, you need to increase the size of the calibration data set until the
error goes.

.TP
.B \-directmap\fR
Use direct mapping between the eigenvalues and the distribution parameters instead of the
log of the eigenvalues

.TP
.B \-infofile\fR <\fIInformation file filename\fR>
The Info file that corresponds to the calibration datafile used in the reconstruction.

.SH "AUTHORS"
Kiran K Seunarine <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
sfpeaks(1), sfpicocalibrationdata(1), picopdfs(1), track(1)

.SH BUGS
