.TH "sfpicocalibdata" 1
.SH NAME
sfpicocalibdata \- Generates Spherical Function PICo Calibration Data

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sfpicocalibdata\fR -snr\fR <\fIS\fR> -schemefile \fR <\fIScheme file name\fR> -infooutputfile \fR <\fIinformation output filename\fR> 
[\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
sfpicocalibdata creates synthetic data for use with sflutgen.  The synthetic data is
generated using a mixture of gaussians, in the same way datasynth generates data.  Each
voxel of data models a slightly different fibre configuration (varying fractional
anisotrpy and fibre-crossings) and undergoes a random rotation to help account for any
directional bias in the chosen acquisition scheme.  A second file, which stores
information about the datafile,  is generated along with the datafile.

.SH EXAMPLES
To create a calibration dataset using the default settings, use the command

sfpicocalibdata -snr 20 -schemefile A.scheme -infooutputfile PICo_data.info >
PICo_data.Bfloat

The default settings create a large dataset (249,231 voxels), of which 3401 voxels
contain a single fibre population per voxel and the rest of the voxels contain two
fibre-populations. The amount of data produced can be varied by specifying the ranges and
steps of the parameters for both the one and two fibre datasets used. For example, the
command

sfpicocalibdata -schemefile A.scheme -snr 20 -infooutputfile PICO_data.info -twodtfarange
0.3 0.9 -twodtfastep 0.02 -twodtanglerange 0 0.785 -twodtanglestep 0.03925 -twodtmixmax
0.8 -twodtmixstep 0.1 > PICO_data.Bfloat

would provide 76,313 voxels of synthetic data, where 3401 voxels simulate the one fibre
cases and 72,912 voxels simulate the various two fibre cases. However, care should be
taken to ensure that enough data is generated for calcuating the lut.

.SH OPTIONS
sfpicocalibdata processes options in command line order.

.TP
.B \-inputfile\fR <\fIinput filename\fR>
See modelfit(1).

.TP
.B \-outputfilestem\fR <\fIoutput filename\fR>
See modelfit(1).

.TP
.B \-schemefile\fR <\fIScheme file name\fR>
See modelfit(1).

.TP
.B \-infooutputfile\fR <\fIinformation output filename\fR>
The name to be given to the information output filename.

.TP
.B \-trace\fR <\fIthe trace\fR>
See datasynth(1).

.TP
.B \-onedtfarange\fR <\fIthe fa range for the single tensor case\fR>
This flag is used to provide the minimum and maximum fa for the single tensor synthetic
data

.TP
.B \-onedtfastep\fR <\fIthe fa step size for the single tensor\fR>
controls how many steps there are between the minimum and maximum fa settings

.TP
.B \-twodtfarange\fR <\fIthe fa range for the two tensor case\fR>
This flag is used to provide the minimum and maximum fa for the two tensor synthetic
data.  The fa is varied for both tensors to give all the different permutations

.TP
.B \-twodtfastep\fR <\fIthe fa step size for the two tensor case\fR>
controls how many steps there are between the minimum and maximum fa settings for the two
tensor cases

.TP
.B \-twodtanglerange\fR <\fIthe crossing angle range for the two fibre cases\fR>
Use this flag to specify the minimum and maximum crossing angles between the two fibres

.TP
.B \-twodtanglestep\fR <\fIthe crossing angle step size\fR>
controls how many steps there are between the minimum and maximum crossing angles for the
two tensor cases

.TP
.B \-twodtmixmax \fR <\fImixing parameter\fR>
controls the proportion of one fibre population to the other.  the minimum mixing
parameter is (1 - twodtmixmax)

.TP
.B \-twodtmixstep\fR <\fIthe mixing parameter step size for the two tensor case\fR>
Used to specify how many mixing parameter increments to use

.TP
.B \-snr\fR <\fIS\fR>
See datasynth(1).

.TP
.B \-seed\fR <\fIseed\fR>
See datasynth(1).

.SH "AUTHORS"
Phil Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk> Kiran K Seunarine <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
sflutgen(1)

.SH BUGS