.\" $Id: sfskewness.1,v 1.2 2006/07/24 15:52:34 ucacdxa Exp $

.TH "sfskewness" 1

.SH NAME
sfskewness \- Computes an index of skewness of spherical functions.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B sfskewness -inputmodel <sh|rbf|maxent>
[\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Computes the skewness of any input spherical function.	The skewness of a function f is
the cube root of int(f(x) - F)^3/int(f^3(x)) where F = \int(f(x)) and the integrals are
all over the unit sphere. The program approximates the integrals by summing over a set of
around 8000 points evenly distributed on the sphere. To decrease computation time, the
size of the point set can be reduced using the -pointset option.

.SH EXAMPLES

Here are some examples using synthetic data.

Create a synthetic data set:

datasynth -testfunc 3 -snr 16 -voxels 4 -schemefile test/bmx7.scheme > T3_BMX7.Bfloat


Fit the spherical harmonics with maximum order 2 and compute the skewness:

shfit -order 2 -schemefile test/bmx7.scheme < T3_BMX7.Bfloat | sfskewness -inputmodel sh
-order 2 | double2txt

 -2.014889E-01
 -2.120732E-01
 -1.961482E-01
 -2.428282E-01

Try with maximum order 4: shfit -order 4 -schemefile test/bmx7.scheme < T3_BMX7.Bfloat |
sfskewness -inputmodel sh -order 4 | double2txt 7.941038E-02 -1.698385E-01 -1.204264E-01
1.178613E-01

Repeat using PASMRI: mesd -filter PAS 1.4 -schemefile test/bmx7.scheme < T3_BMX7.Bfloat |
sfskewness -inputmodel maxent -filter PAS 1.4 -mepointset 54 | double2txt 9.906369E-01
9.908336E-01 9.408537E-01 9.956099E-01

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-inputmodel\fR <\fIsh|rbf|maxent|dt\fR>
Tells the program what type of functions are input.  Currently supported options are:

sh - Spherical harmonic series. (Must specify -order.)

maxent - Maximum entropy representations output by mesd. (Must specify -filter and
-mepointset.)

rbf - Sums of radial basis functions. (Must specify rbf parameters, eg -rbfsigma, and
-rbfpointset.)

.TP
.B \-pointset\fR <\f0|1|2|3|4|5|6|7\fR>
Choose the point set used for the numerical integration.  The point sets have sizes:

 0 - 1082
 1 - 1922
 2 - 4322
 3 - 8672
 4 - 15872
 5 - 32672
 6 - 72032
 7 - 78032

The default is point set 3.

.SH "SEE ALSO"
fa(1), shfit(1), qballmx(1), mesd(1), sfanis(1), sfkurtosis(1)

.SH BUGS

.SH AUTHOR
Danny Alexander <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>
