.\" $Id$

.TH subsetscheme 1

.SH NAME
subsetscheme \- Create scheme files from a subset of directions in an existing scheme

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B subsetscheme -schemefile \fR <\fIfile\fR> \fB-subsetpoints\fR <\fIpoints\fR> 
\fB-outputroot\fR <\fIroot\fR> [\fB-imagelist\fR <\fIlist\fB>]

 
.SH DESCRIPTION

This program takes the output of \fBsubsetpoints\fR and produces scheme files
corresponding to the subsets. Each subset scheme file contains ALL the unweighted (q=0)
measurements in the original scheme, as well as all measurements along the gradient
directions in the subset.


.SH OUTPUT

Subset scheme files - the measurements in the original scheme that correspond to the
gradient directions in the subsetpoints file are output as outputRoot_[0...N-1].scheme,
where there are N subsets.

Subset indices - the integer indices of the measurements from the full scheme that are in
the subset, indexed from zero.

Image lists - If an image list is provided with the \fB-imagelist\fR option, the subset
image lists are produced. The image list should be one line per measurement, containing the 
file name of the associated image volume. This can be produced from a 4D Nifti image with 
\fBsplit4dnii\fR.


.SH EXAMPLES

Begin with an existing scheme file, A.scheme, which consists of 3 b=0 measurements and 60
b=1000 s / mm^2 measurements spread over the sphere. The 60 diffusion-weighted
measurements are stored in the file A.points.

   subsetpoints -inputfile A.points -pointspersubset 20 20 20 -outputfile A_subsets

Create scheme files for each of the subsets

   subsetscheme -schemefile A.scheme -subsetpoints A_subsets -outputroot subset

The files subset_[0,1,2].scheme are created, each containing the 3 b=0 measurements,
followed by the b=1000 measurements in each subset.

If the diffusion-weighted images are stored as Nifti volumes, an image list can also be
created for the subsets. If all 63 volumes are listed in the file imagelist.txt, then the
command

    subsetscheme -schemefile A.scheme -subsetpoints A_subsets -outputroot subset -imagelist imagelist.txt

will also produce subset_[0,1,2].imagelist, which contains the volumes in each subset.


.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-schemefile\fR 
Scheme file for the complete imaging scheme. 

.TP
.B \-subsetpoints\fR 
Output from subsetpoints containing one or more subsets of the directions in the scheme
file.

.TP
.B \-outputroot\fR 
Root for the output file names.

.TP
.B \-imagelist\fR 
Image list containing file names of raw DWI images for the complete imaging scheme. These
will  be parsed and an image list will be created for each subset.

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
pointset2scheme(1), subsetpoints(1)

.SH BUGS
