.\" $Id: targetprobs2txt.1,v 1.2 2006/04/20 12:54:36 ucacdxa Exp $

.TH targetprobs2txt 1

.SH NAME
targetprobs2txt \- Converts results of connectivity based segmentation to a text file.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B targetprobs2txt \fR -inputroot <\fIroot\fR> -seedfile <\fIfile\fR> -targetfile <\fIfile\fR> 
-pd <\fIpd\fR> -regionindex <\fIindex\fR> -outputfile <\fIfile\fR>

.SH DESCRIPTION

This tool reads PICo connection probability maps, seeds and an associated target file,
and outputs a table of the seed points and the connection probabilities to each target
region. The output format is

 x y z cp_1 cp_2 ... cp_n
 x y z cp_1 cp_2 ... cp_n

Where x,y,z are the voxel coordinates of the seed point, and there are n targets in the
target file. The target regions are numbered in ascending order according to their
intensity value in the target file.

.SH EXAMPLES

Pass streamlines from the file tracts.Bfloat to \fBprocstreamlines\fR, to produce target
connection probability images.

  cat tracts.Bfloat | procstreamlines -seedfile seeds.hdr -targetfile targets.hdr -outputcp
	-outputroot subject_targetcp_


The seed file contains two ROIs labelled 1, with m seeds, and 2, with n seeds. The file
tracts.Bfloat contains streamlines tracked over the both ROIs with \fBtrack\fR. Each seed
point contains one principal direction.

The above command produces the files

  subject_targetcp_1_[1,2,...,m].[ext]
  subject_targetcp_2_[1,2,...,n].[ext]


We get the target probabilities of these files with

  targetprobs2txt -seedfile seeds.hdr -targetfile targets.hdr -inputroot subject_targetcp_ -regionindex 1
	> targetprobs_r1.txt

  targetprobs2txt -seedfile seeds.hdr -targetfile targets.hdr -inputroot subject_targetcp_ -regionindex 2
	> targetprobs_r2.txt

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-inputroot\fR <\fIroot\fR>

Root of the connection probability images. This is the path to the files up to (but not
including) the region index.

.TP
.B \-seedfile\fR <\fIfile\fR>

The seed file used for the tracking.

.TP
.B \-targetfile\fR <\fIfile\fR>

The target image.

.TP
.B \-pd\fR <\fIpd\fR>

Index of the principal direction followed at the seed point. Default is 1.

.TP
.B \-regionindex\fR <\fIindex\fR>

Index of the ROI in the seed file. Default is 1.

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
track(1), procstreamlines(1)

.SH BUGS
