.\" $Id$

.TH tractstatimage 1 

.SH NAME
tractstatimage \- Computes images based on statistics from streamline tracts.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tractstatimage [\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION

This program is an extension to \fBtractstats\fR that combines statistics from streamline
tracts into an image.

The tract statistic is computed for each tract using the methods described in
tractstats(1). The statistic from each tract is combined into a single value according
to the image statistic, which is specified by the \fB-imagestat\fR option. The image
statistic in each voxel in the image is computed from the tract statistics of either all
tracts seeded in that voxel (default behaviour) or all tracts that intersect the voxel.

.SH IMAGE STATISTICS

The image statistic is either the mean, minimum, maximum, median, or variance of the
tract statistics in each voxel. By default, each voxel of the image only contains the
values from tracts that are seeded in that voxel. This option can be changed with the
\fB-countintersect\fR option.

.SH COUNT INTERSECT

With the \fB-countintersect\fR option, the value from each tract is added to all voxels
intersected by the tract.

.SH EXAMPLES
Output the maximum of the mean FA values (one value per input tract) in each voxel.

 cat tracts.Bfloat | tractstatimage -scalarfile fa.nii.gz -outputroot tract_meanFA_max \\ 
 -tractstat mean -imagestat max

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-scalarfile\fR <\fIfile\fR>
Path to an image containing the scalars. The image should be defined in the same space as
the streamlines. The image dimensions are taken from the header.

.TP
.B \-interpolate\fR
Use tri-linear interpolation to find the image value at each point on the streamline. If
this  is not specified, the default behaviour is to use nearest-neighbour interpolation.

.TP
.B \-tractstat\fR <\fIstat\fR>
One of "mean", "min", "max", "median", "var", "sum", "length", "endpointsep". This is the
statistic  computed for each tract. All options except "length" and "endpointsep" refer
to image statistics, and should be accompanied by a scalar file.

.TP
.B \-header\fR <\fIhdr\fR>
Used to define image space when a scalar file is not used, eg when the tractstat is
"length". 

.TP
.B \-imagestat\fR <\fIstat\fR>
One of "mean", "min", "max", "median", "var". This is the statistic computed on the 
tract statistics in each voxel.

.TP
.B \-countintersect\fR
Each tract statistic is placed in all voxels intersected by the tract, rather than just
in the	seed voxel.

.TP
.B \-outputroot\fR <\fIroot\fR>
Output of the image statistic is to root.[ext], which is defined by the input header.

.SH AUTHORS
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
tractstats(1), track(1), procstreamlines(1)

.SH BUGS
