.\" $Id: vcthreshselect.1,v 1.9 2005/12/12 16:04:38 ucacpco Exp $

.TH "vcthreshselect" 1
.SH NAME
vcthreshselect \- Visualizes F-test data from voxelclassify(1).

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vcthreshselect
-datadims <\fIx\fR> <\fIy\fR> <\fIz\fR> -order <\fIorder\fR> [-bgthresh <\fIvalue\fR>
-csfthresh <\fIvalue\fR> -ftest <\fIf1 f1 f3\fR>]

.SH DESCRIPTION
This program loads the raw F-test data from voxelclassify(1) and provides a preview of
the voxel classification. Users can adjust the thresholds and update the classification
in real time.

The default plane view is axial and the user may switch to sagittal or coronal by
clicking the buttons. Left-clicking on a voxel sets crosshairs for quick slice selection.
For example, if the current view is axial and the current slice is 20, clicking the voxel
(50,60) will set the reslice crosshairs to (50,60,20). Clicking sagittal then
automatically switches to the slice (x = 50), and clicking coronal switches to the slice
(y = 60). Right-clicking removes the crosshairs.

The boxes at the bottom of the screen contain the thresholds (from left to right) for the
order 2 model, the order 4 model, and the order 6 and above models. The scroll bars move
the thresholds between 1E-1 and 1E-50. The text boxes also accept direct input of the
form 1E-X (X between 1 and 50).

After thresholds are changed, the update button does the model selection with the new
thresholds. This allows multiple changes to the thresholds without recalculating the
classification. If auto update box is selected, the voxel classification will be updated
immediately after any change to the thresholds.

The default input data type is double. The save button writes the current voxel
classification as an int volume.

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-datadims\fR <\fIx\fR> <\fIy\fR> <\fIz\fR>
The dimensions of the image, in voxels.

.TP
.B \-order\fR <\fImaxOrder\fR> 
The maximum order in the f-test data. 

.TP
.B \-bgthresh\fR <\fIminA0\fR> 
Consider all voxels with A(0) less than minA0 to be background, regardless of the F-Test
statistics.

.TP
.B \-csfthresh\fR <\fImaxA0\fR> 
Consider all voxels with A(0) greater than maxA0 to be CSF (and therefore isotropic),
regardless of the F-Test statistics.

.TP
.B \-ftest\fR <\fIf1 f2 f3\fR> 
Specify the initial F-Test thresholds. Input must be in the range 1E-1 to 1E-50, and will
be rounded to the nearest power of 10.

.SH EXAMPLES

Run voxelclassify on a 128x128x60 data set, max order 4, and view results.

voxelclassify -inputfile SubjectA.Bfloat -schemefile A.scheme

    -order 4 | vcthreshselect -datadims 128 128 60 -order 4 
    -bgthresh 100 -csfthresh 3000 

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <p.cook@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
voxelclassify(1)

.SH BUGS
