.\" $Id: voxelclassify.1,v 1.5 2005/10/19 18:13:47 ucacdxa Exp $

.TH "voxelclassify" 1
.SH NAME
voxelclassify \- Classifies voxels according to the lowest-order spherical harmonic
series needed to fit the data adequately.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B voxelclassify 
[-bgthresh <value>] [-csfthresh <maxA0>] [-order <maxOrder>]  [-ftest <thresholds>]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Computes the spherical harmonic expansion of log(A(q)) in each voxel and uses an F-test
to determine the simplest model that gives a good fit to the data.

If F-test thresholds are specified, the program performs the F-Test and outputs the
highest spherical harmonic order required to fit the data: 0 for isotropic data, 2 for
anisotropic Gaussian, and 4 or more (up to the maximum) for anisotropic non-Gaussian
data. Voxels classified as background (see OPTIONS) have order -1.

If no f-test thresholds are specified on the command line, the program outputs all the
f-statistics in each voxel for independent processing. These results are suitable for
reading into the vcthreshselect program for interactive model selection. The format of
the output for each voxel is:

 exit code
 log b=0 intensity estimate
 f statistic comparing order 0 and order 2 models
 f for order 0 and 4
 :
 f for order 0 and n where n is the maximum order specified
 f for order 2 and 4
 :
 f for order 2 and n
 :
 f for order n-2 and n

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-ftest\fR <\fIthresholds\fR>
Specifies the F-test thresholds for adopting higher order models. A threshold must be
provided for every order between 0 and the maximum order. The program will not consider a
higher order model unless the result of the F-test is smaller than the relevant
threshold.

.TP
.B \-bgthresh\fR <\fIminA0\fR>
Classifies all voxels with A(0) < minA0 as background, without performing the F-test on
the voxel. Ignored if -ftest is not specified.

.TP
.B \-csfthresh\fR <\fImaxA0\fR>
Classifies all voxels with A(0) > maxA0 as isotropic, without performing the F-Test on
the voxel. Ignored if -ftest is not specified.

.TP 
.B \-bgmask \fR <\fIimage\fR>
Set an explicit brain / background mask. Overrides -bgthresh.

.TP
.B \-order\fR <\fImaxOrder\fR> 
Set the maximum even spherical harmonic order that will be considered by the program.
Must be a positive even number. Default is 4.

.SH EXAMPLES

Classify the data in image SubjectA.Bfloat, using no csf threshold. Classify all voxels
with A(0) < 50.0 as background. The threshold for selecting an order 2 model is 1E-20,
the thresholds for the order 4 and 6 model are 1E-6.

voxelclassify -inputfile SubjectA.Bfloat -bgthresh 50.0 -schemefile A.scheme -order 6
-ftest 1E-20 1E-6 1E-6 > SubjectA.VC.Bint

The next example does the same thing, but because no -ftest is specified, the program
outputs the raw F-Test data for later analysis (eg with vcthreshselect(1)).

voxelclassify -inputfile SubjectA.Bfloat -schemefile A.scheme -order 6 >
SubjectA.VCthresholds.Bdouble

.SH "AUTHORS"
Daniel Alexander <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
vcthreshselect(1)

.SH BUGS
