.\" $Id: voxel2scanner.1,v 1.2 2005/06/15 08:42:33 ucacdxa Exp $

.TH voxel2scanner 1

.SH NAME
voxel2scanner \- Converts voxel-order data to scanner-order data.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B voxel2scanner
-voxels <number of voxels> -components <measurements per voxel> [\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Converts voxel-order data files, used by Camino, to scanner order. See scanner2voxel(1)
for a description of these formats.

The output data type is big endian floating points.

.SH EXAMPLES
Convert voxel-order data file VoxelOrder.Bfloat, for which the measurement volume has
size 128x128x60 and the acquisition scheme acquires 6 measurements with b=0 and 54
diffusion-weighted measurements, to scanner order:

voxel2scanner -voxels 983040 -components 60 < VoxelOrder.Bfloat > ScannerOrder.img

Equivalently:

voxel2scanner -voxels 983040 -components 60 -inputfile VoxelOrder.Bfloat >
ScannerOrder.img


Fit the diffusion tensor to the scanner-order data in ScannerOrder.img, assuming the
acquisition scheme is specified in A.scheme, and convert the output to scanner order:

scanner2voxel -voxels 983040 -components 60 < ScannerOrder.img | dtfit - A.scheme
-nonlinear | voxel2scanner -voxels 983040 -components 8 -inputdatatype double >
DiffTensorA.img

.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.B \-voxels <number of voxels>
The number of voxels in the input data.

.TP
.B \-components <number of measurements>
The number of measurements per voxel.

.TP
.B \-inputfile <\fIinput filename\fR>
The name of the input file.

.TP
.B \-inputdatatype <\fIdata type of input\fR>
Specifies the data type of the input file.  The data type can be any of the following
strings: "char", "short", "int", "long", "float" or "double".

.TP
.B \-outputdatatype <\fIdata type of output\fR>
Specifies the data type of the output data.  The data type can be any of the following
strings: "char", "short", "int", "long", "float" or "double".

.SH "AUTHORS"
Daniel Alexander <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
scanner2voxel(1)

.SH BUGS
