.\" $Id$

.TH vtkstreamlines 1

.SH NAME
vtkstreamlines \- Convert streamlines to VTK

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B vtkstreamlines [\fIoptions\fR]

.SH DESCRIPTION

Converts raw or voxel format streamlines to VTK polydata. These can be loaded into
Paraview or other programs that read VTK data. Scalar data can be associated with the
streamlines, this can be used to scale or colour the data within VTK.

The options for scalar data are:

  \fBNo scalars\fR - the default.

  \fBColour by orientation\fR - colour the streamline points by local orientation.

  \fBSeed ROI\fR - the scalar value for each point on the streamline is the ROI index of its seed point.

  \fBtarget ROI\fR - the scalar value for each point on the streamline is the index of the first target ROI 
   that it intersects. Each segment (either side of the seed) is treated separately, unless one segment
   intersects a target and the other does not, in which case the entire streamline has the scalar of the
   intersected target.

  \fBCustom scalars\fR - pass any Analyze image that is in the same physical space as the tracts. Each point
   of the streamline has the scalar value from the corresponding point in the image.

With the exception of orientation RGB encoding, the mapping of scalars to colours is
handled by a VTK lookup table, which is provided at run time. Streamlines coloured by
orientation have 24-bit RGB scalars, which are interpreted directly as colours.

Input data must be raw binary tracts (the output of \fBtrack\fR and
\fBprocstreamlines\fR). These tracts are described in the same physical space as the
scalar image passed to this program.

.SH EXAMPLES

Produce streamlines with no scalars.

  vtkstreamlines < streamlines.Bfloat > streamlines.vtk


Encode the local orientation of the streamline as an RGB colour scalar.

  vtkstreamlines -colourorient < streamlines.Bfloat > streamlines_rgborient.vtk


Use the ROI index of the seed point as the scalar. This produces one colour per seed ROI

  vtkstreamlines -seedfile seeds.nii < streamlines.Bfloat > streamlines_seed.vtk


Use the ROI index of the target as the scalar. This produces one colour per target ROI.
Streamlines that do not intersect any target have zero scalars.

  vtkstreamlines -targetfile targets.nii < streamlines.Bfloat > streamlines_target.vtk


Use the local fractional anisotropy as the scalar for each point.

 vtkstreamlines -scalarfile fa.nii.gz < streamlines.Bfloat > streamlines_fa.vtk

.SH OPTIONS

.TP
.B \-colourorient
Each point on the streamline is coloured by the local orientation. The colour coding
scheme is the same as described in pdview(1).

.TP
.B \-scalarfile
An image that is in the same physical space as the tracts. Each point of the streamline 
has the scalar value from the corresponding point in the image.

.TP
.B \-interpolatescalars, -interpolate
With this option, the scalar value at each point on the streamline is calculated by
trilinear  interpolation. By default, nearest-neighbour interpolation is used. Smoothness
of the scalar values may be increased by using this option and by running the streamlines
through \fBprocstreamlines\fR with resampling enabled.

.TP
.B \-seedfile
Seed ROI used to generate the tracts, as defined in track(1).

.TP
.B \-targetfile
An image containing integer-valued target regions, as defined in track(1). 

.TP
.B \-voxeldims\fR <\fIx\fR> <\fIy\fR> <\fIz\fR>
The x, y, and z dimension of each voxel, in millimetres. Not required if any image file
is used or a header is passed with \fB-header\fR.

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
track(1), procstreamlines(1), pdview(1)

.SH CAVEATS
