.\" $Id$

.TH wdtfit 1

.SH NAME
wdtfit \- Fits the diffusion tensor to diffusion MRI measurements.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B wdtfit
<data file> <scheme file> [noise var map file] [options]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Reads diffusion MRI data, acquired using the acquisition scheme detailed in the scheme
file, and fits the diffusion tensor to the log of the data using a weighted linear least
squares regression. For help with scheme files, please see the section "scheme files" in
camino(1).

The data file stores the diffusion MRI data in voxel order with the measurements stored
as big-endian four-byte floats and ordered as in the scheme file. See modelfit(1) and
camino(1) for the format of the data file and scheme file. The program fits the diffusion
tensor to each voxel and outputs the results, in voxel order and as big-endian eight-byte
doubles, to the standard output. The program outputs eight values in each voxel: [exit
code, ln(S(0)), D_xx, D_xy, D_xz, D_yy, D_yz, D_zz]. An exit code of zero indicates no
problems. For a list of other exit codes, see modelfit(1). The entry S(0) is an estimate
of the signal at q=0.

The weighted fitting is an iterative process; the weights are initialized to the
predicted DW signal given the tensor from the ordinary least squares inversion (inversion
1, or the default for \fBdtfit\fR). The weights for the next iteration are the predicted
signal from the previous estimate of D. This follows the procedure of Basser and Le
Bihan, J Magn Reson B 40:247-254 (1994) and Salvador et al, Human Brain Mapping
24:144-155 (2005).

If any of the data is bad, ie, log(S_i) cannot be computed for any i, then that
measurement is excluded from the fitting procedure.

The noise variance map is a map of the estimated variance of the noise in the voxel,
assuming that the noise can be approximated by a zero-mean Gaussian distribution
(reasonable for a signal to noise ratio > 5). If the weighted fit cannot be calculated
for any reason, the output is the unweighted inversion.

The noise variance sigma^2 is the sum of the squares of the weighted residuals normalized
by the number of degrees of freedom in the voxel. If there are N diffusion-weighted
measurements and none are bad, the degrees of freedom is (N - 7), since there are 7
parameters in the fitting (6 for the DT, plus S_0).

This program is a simplified wrapper to \fBmodelfit\fR. The command

 wdtfit SubjectA.Bfloat A.scheme 

is equivalent to

 modelfit -inputfile SubjectA.Bfloat -schemefile A.scheme -inversion 7

The command

 dtfit SubjectA.Bfloat A.scheme sigmaSq.Bdouble

is equivalent to

 modelfit -inputfile SubjectA.Bfloat -schemefile A.scheme -inversion 7 -noisemap sigmaSq.Bdouble

To read data from stdin, do:

 cat <data file> | wdtfit - A.scheme



The handedness of the coordinate system used by the scanner may not agree with that used
within Camino. If this happens, the anisotropy and trace of tensors will be correct but
the orientations will be incorrect. This problem is often only noticed during
tractography. A simple way to check for this is to fit the diffusion tensors and
visualize the principal directions with the \fBdtpdview\fR program. If the principal
directions appear to be rotated by 180 degrees about the X, Y or Z directions, then the
likely cause is that the gradient directions do not agree. This can be remedied by
negating the relevant entries in the scheme file.

.SH EXAMPLES
Fit the diffusion tensor to the data in SubjectA.Bfloat using weighted linear regression
to the log measurements:

wdtfit SubjectA.Bfloat A.scheme > DiffTensorA.Bdouble

Equivalently:

cat SubjectA.Bfloat | wdtfit - A.scheme > DiffTensorA.Bdouble

.SH "AUTHORS"
Philip Cook <camino@cs.ucl.ac.uk>

.SH "SEE ALSO"
modelfit(1), dtfit(1)

.SH BUGS
